Food and nutritional 
security in India
Solutions to bring zero hunger, ensure 
food and nutritional security
KPMG. Make the Difference.
kpmg.com/in
The topic of food security has been at the forefront of Indian public policy since the eve of its 
independence. Even though India holds strong position in food production and export 
markets, there are problems in providing access to food and balanced nutrition to all. Global 
Hunger Index (GHI) report of 2024 (where India ranks 105th among 127 countries) and State 
of Food Security and Nutrition in the World (SOFI) report from UN over 19.46 crore (~13.4 per 
cent) people are chronically undernourished in India reflects the seriousness of the food 
insecurity, malnutrition, and hunger. Addressing food insecurity, malnutrition, and hunger 
requires a multi-scale, multi-level, and multi-stakeholder approach across inter-linked 
segments such as agriculture and public food distribution.
India's GHI score has improved from 29.3 in 2016 to 27.3 in 20243, showing considerable progress 
despite the pandemic lockdowns of 2020-2021. Undernutrition is a grave issue in India, with one-
third of the world's malnourished children residing in the country. Children under five years4 show 
high prevalence of malnutrition, with 13.7 per cent undernourished, 35.5 per cent stunted, 18.7 per 
cent wasted and child mortality at 2.9 per cent. As per National Family Health Survey (NFHS) 
published in 2021, anaemia5 affects 67.1 per cent of children (6-59 months) and 52.2 per cent of 
pregnant women (15-49 years) in India. The Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS) 
program, initiated in 1975, aims to improve the health, nutrition, and development of children under 
six years, pregnant women, and lactating mothers through Anganwadi centers. These centers 
provide supplementary nutrition, nutritional guidance, immunisation, basic health care, and 
preschool education. 
1.
Global Hunger Index Scores by 2024, Concern Worldwide, Welthungerhilfe, and the Institute for International Law of Peace and Armed Conflict (IFHV)
2.
The State of Food Security and Nutrition in the World (SOFI) Report – 2024, World Food Programme
3.
Global Hunger Index Scores, Concern Worldwide, Welthungerhilfe, and the Institute for International Law of Peace and Armed Conflict (IFHV), 2016 and 2024
4.
Malnutrition-Free India, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Women and Child Development, December 2021
5.
Anaemia mukt Bharat, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, February 2022 
Factors 
impacting 
Hunger, Food 
and Nutritional 
Security 
in India
Access to 
Food
Undernutrition 
and Food Access 
to School Children
Infrastructure 
and Technology 
Gaps
Food 
Availability 
and Import 
dependency
Micronutrient 
deficiency and 
Supplementary 
Nutrition
Undernutrition
The Mid-Day Meal (MDM) scheme, rebranded 
as Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM 
POSHAN)8, has been instrumental in 
addressing the nutritional needs of school-age 
children since 1995. Serving free lunches to 
12.169 crore school children annually, it is one 
of the world's largest school feeding programs. 
This initiative ensures that poverty does not 
hinder education, addressing hunger and 
malnutrition while promoting local food 
production through the School Nutrition Garden 
Scheme. This initiative also complements 
Sustainability Development Goal (SDG) 4 – 
Quality and inclusive education along with Zero 
hunger SDG 2 goal. 
Countries like USA10, European countries 
(Sweden11, Finland12, Estonia13), Brazil14, 
Kenya15 and Rwanda16 are providing free school 
meals to ensure access to healthy diets and 
micronutrient sufficiency. For example, USA17 
and Brazil18 source fresh produce from local 
farms, promoting local agriculture and ensuring 
fresh meals. Finland19 and Japan20 incorporate 
nutrition education into their meal program that 
covers healthy eating habits and balanced diet.
Some of the state governments have taken 
initiative to include eggs, fortified salt, fortified 
cooking oil and millets in the school meals as 
part of Mid-Day Meal Scheme. Karnataka21 
introduced Ragi milk thrice a week in November 
2024, and Odisha22 implemented fortified milk 
(Vitamin A and D) for 44.5 lakh children as pilot 
project in January mid, 2025. Andhra Pradesh23 
extended the mid-day meal scheme to junior 
college students, benefiting 1.5 lakh students in 
addition to 36.6 lakh primary school students, to 
curb dropouts.
Access to food for school children
6.
Poshan Abhiyaan 2024, Ministry of Women and Child Development, Accessed on 13 
February 2025
7.
7th Rashtriya Poshan Maah, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, September 2024
8.
Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Nirman (PM POSHAN), Ministry of Education, Accessed on 
13 February 2025
9.
Improvement in nutritional status of girls and mothers, Press Information Bureau, Ministry 
of Women and Child Development, August 2023 
10.
School meals and food programs for children, USAGov, Accessed on 13 February 2025
11.
School lunches, Swedish Food Agency, Accessed on 13 February 2025
12.
School meals in Finland, Finnish National Agency for Education, Accessed on 13 February 
2025
13.
School meal/feeding program(s) – Republic of Estonia, The Global Child Nutrition Forum, 
April 2022
14.
Brazil: National School Feeding Program (PNAE), Global Alliance against Hunger and 
Poverty, Accessed on 13 February 2025
15.
Kenya’s school feeding programme: A vital safety net for the most vulnerable learners, 
African Cities Research Consortium (ACRC), October 2024
16.
Rwanda School Feeding Operational Guidelines Summary, Ministry of Education, Republic 
of Rwanda, May 2021
17.
From Farm to Table: Exploring the Journey of the Farm-to-Table Movement, American Fruit 
and Vegetable, Accessed on 13 February 2025
18.
Entenda como funciona o Programa de Aquisição de Alimentos, Agricultura e Pecuária, 
Government of Brazil, April 2020 (Translated: Understand how the Food Acquisition 
Program works, Agriculture and Livestock, Government of Brazil, April 2020)
19.
School Meals in Finland, Finnish National Agency of Education, Accessed on 13 February 
2025 
20.
School Lunches: The Key to Children’s Health and Prosperity, The Government of Japan, 
November 2021
21.
Karnataka announces ragi malt three days a week at govt schools from Feb 22, Bangalore 
News - The Indian Express, February 2021
22.
Nourishing Futures: The 'Gift Milk' Initiative for School Children, OdishaPlus Bureau, 
January 2025
23.
Mid-day meal scheme returns to government junior colleges in Andhra Pradesh, The 
Hindu, January 2025
Iron and folic acid supplementation is provided 
for pregnant and lactating mothers to prevent 
and combat anaemia. POSHAN Abhiyan (earlier 
National Nutrition Mission) including ICDS aims 
at improving the nutritional status of adolescent 
girls, pregnant women and lactating mothers 
across the country since 2018. 
Over 69.4 lakh pregnant women and 42.5 lakh 
lactating women7 are benefitting from the 
POSHAN Abhiyan scheme. Leveraging 
technology such as ICT based platform (Poshan 
Tracker), providing diversified diet including 
millets, developing regional meal plans for 
addressing anaemia and micro-nutrient 
deficiencies have been used to improve the 
efficiency of the mission. Establishing local 
community gardens and sourcing fresh produce, 
developing iron rich diet, meal plan and 
appointing village and/or district level qualified 
nutritionist for regular counselling and 
consultation will improve the nutritional status 
and overall well-being of children and mothers 
in India. These health and nutrition schemes 
can be integrated with National Health Mission 
for holistic healthcare services.
Vulnerable rural and urban households face 
limited access to markets and income disparity, 
restricting their ability to purchase sufficient and 
nutritious food. The SOFI report states that 74 
per cent of the population cannot afford healthy 
diet and 39 per cent lack nutrient-adequate diet 
in India. The National Food Security Act (NFSA) 
of 2013 was a landmark policy reform to drive 
the Public Distribution System (PDS), 
guaranteeing subsidised food grains for 75 per 
cent of the rural and 50 per cent of the urban 
population, with additional provisions for the 
poorest households under the Antyodaya Anna 
Yojana. 
PDS24, the world’s largest food subsidy 
programme covers 80.67 crore people across 
India via over five lakh Fair Price Shops (FPS), 
providing access to essential commodities such 
as wheat, rice, sugar, and kerosene at 
subsidised rates. Similar food subsidy schemes 
are provided by developing nations such as 
Brazil (Zero Hunger Programme or Fome Zero), 
Ethiopia (Productive Safety Net Programme) 
and Bangladesh (Vulnerable Group 
Development (VGD) Programme), however 
India’s PDS remains one of the largest in the 
world. 
Indian PDS is evolving towards targeted public 
distribution system focusing on Below Poverty 
Line (BPL) households, with INR2.05 lakh 
crores allotted for food subsidies in 2024-25 
budget. The use of electronic Point of Sale 
(ePoS) devices, Aadhaar-based authentication, 
digitalisation of records are critical in eliminating 
duplicate ration cards and reducing leakages. 
Going forward, Scheme for Modernisation and 
Reforms through Technology in Public 
Distribution System (SMART-PDS)25 will 
leverage data analysis and cloud technology. 
This scheme will issue smart ration cards and 
authenticate the beneficiary through fingerprint 
recognition. Centralisation of databases of all 
food stock warehouses, distribution centers, and 
direct beneficiaries will be the key for the 
digitalization and SMART-PDS.
Access to food for all
24.
Public Distribution System (PDS), Department of Food and Public Distribution, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, Accessed on 13 
February 2025
25.
SMART-PDS, a technological driven initiative should be implemented in all States/UTs, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and 
Public Distribution, March 2023 
Ensuring transparency and efficiency is 
challenging of PDS due to leakages. PDS 
leakages has decreased from 41.7 per cent in 
2011 to 22 per cent in 202226, yet over 2.8 crore 
MT of food grains was estimated to be either 
stolen or wasted through PDS leakages in 
2024.Lack of moisture and temperature control, 
pest infestation, poor record-keeping and 
improper handling impacts food quality while 
storing food grains in the warehouses. 
Addressing these issues require inventory and 
route optimisation, geographical planning, 
investments and maintenance of the storage 
and transportation facilities, integrating 
technology in managing, tracking, storing and 
distributing food grains such as GPS tracking 
from farm-warehouse-ration shops, along with 
easier and quicker RTI litigation measures for 
the public. Initiatives such as PM Gati Shakti 
and Anna Chakra are helpful tools that could be 
implemented to optimise of food grains 
movement across supply chain points, minimise 
transportation costs and delivery times.
Rural regions face bigger challenges in food 
distribution due to transportation, storage, and 
resource limitations. Some states27, including 
Andhra Pradesh28, Punjab29 and Delhi30, have 
initiated doorstep delivery of food grains at no 
extra cost to beneficiaries. This approach can 
be carefully assessed and scaled up to specific 
regions with vulnerable populations in remote 
and inaccessible areas, reducing their need to 
visit FPS.
Economic disruptions and movement of workers 
to cities and urban regions makes it difficult for 
migrant workers and their families to access 
subsidised food grains. One Nation, One Ration 
Card (ONORC), which began in 2019 provides 
ration card access from any fair price shops 
(FPS) across the country. ONORC has helped 
reduce mobility costs for migrant workers and 
ensured portability of ration cards. Pradhan 
Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana (PMGKAY) 
scheme implemented from April 2020 to 
December 2022 provided food grains free to 
beneficiaries during the COVID-19 period. 
Awareness and education about the ONORC31 
scheme benefits, provision of technology and 
infrastructure such as internet, robust ePoS 
devices for biometric authentication could 
improve the PMGKAY and ONORC schemes 
uptake by all the eligible beneficiaries. 
26.
The Food Security Act has revamped the PDS, The Hindu, September 2024
27.
Home Delivery of Foodgrains, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food 
and Public Distribution, July 2018
28.
Andhra Pradesh CM Jagan Mohan Reddy launches MDUs for door delivery of ration 
supplies, The Hindu, January 2021
29.
Punjab Doorstep Delivery Services Scheme 2024, PM Modi Yojana.org, December 2023
30.
Delhi Doorstep Delivery of Public Services, Department of Food & Civil Supplies, Accessed 
on 13 February 2025
31.
One Nation One Ration Card, Ministry Of Consumer Affairs, Food And Public Distribution, 
Accessed on 13 February 2025
Extensive FPS network32 across the country can 
be leveraged as one-stop solutions for 
community needs, acting as sales channel for 
multiple commodities, providing additional 
services such as Common Service Centre 
(digital payments), banking services, etc., 
Andhra Pradesh successfully sells wider 
commodity range such as pulses, cooking oils in 
its over 29,500 FPS33 with ePoS. The 
Government of India has partnered with Small 
Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI)34 
to improve the viability of FPS across cities such 
as Hyderabad, Ghaziabad, Jaipur, and 
Ahmedabad by providing working capital.
32.
Fair Price Shops Dashboard, National Food Security Portal, Department of Food And Public Distribution, Accessed on 13 February 2025
33.
Fair Price Shops Dashboard, National Food Security Portal, Department of Food And Public Distribution, Accessed on 13 February 2025
34.
Department of Food and Public Distribution, Government of India signs Memorandum of Understandings with SIDBI and NIESBUD for transformation of Fair 
Price Shops, Press Information Bureau, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public Distribution, March 2024 
India is being a large importer of pulses, oil 
seeds, vegetable oils, fruits, and nuts with a 
substantial gap between domestic supply and 
demand. Maintaining sufficient stocks of 
essential staple foods (rice, wheat, and pulses) 
is essential for guaranteeing the food security 
during uncertain situations crisis and natural 
disasters. National Food Security Mission 
(NFSM)35 boosts food production, mainly staple 
crops such as rice, wheat, pulses, and coarse 
cereals by enhancing the area of production and 
crop productivity. NFSM targets rice production 
around one crore MT, wheat at 80 lakh MT to 
stabilise prices, coarse cereals (maize, barley) 
at 30 lakh MT, nutri-cereals (millets) at 20 lakh 
MT, enhancing targets for pulses as 40 lakh MT 
and oilseeds at 20 lakh MT. 
However, over dependency on imports36 for 
pulses and oil seeds risks the food security. In 
2023, agricultural imports were valued at 
USD3300 crores, with vegetable oils accounting 
for USD1710 crores, representing a heavy 
dependence on imported sources. Despite 
being a major producer of pulses, India’s 
imports have increased by 44 per cent in 2023 
compared to 2022. This highlights the need for 
improvement in domestic agricultural practices 
and infrastructure to ensure food security. 
Strategies to tackle inflation and food 
insufficiency include close monitoring of food 
prices, agricultural partnerships for imports, and 
incentivising pulse production through initiatives 
such as the Price Support Scheme (PSS) and 
the Price Stabilisation Fund (PSF). PSF helps 
control price volatility by maintaining a buffer 
stock of pulses and PSS ensures farmers 
receive a minimum support price for their 
produce including pulses.
NFSM-Pulses, PM-AASHA, crop insurance, 
crop rotation, and subsidies for seeds, 
fertilisers, and agri inputs support boosting pulse 
production. NFSM assists farmers with high-
yielding variety seeds and demonstration 
programmes, while PM-AASHA offers MSP 
price support and compensation if market prices 
fall below MSP. Research on resilient pulse 
varieties, hybrid seeds, crop insurance 
schemes, and crop rotation promotion are 
crucial for achieving self-sufficiency in pulse 
production. Climate change monitoring teams 
and climate-resilient sustainable agriculture and 
irrigation technologies are needed to mitigate 
climate change risks.
Achieving food and nutritional security in India 
calls for a holistic and integrated approach that 
addresses the diverse needs of its population. 
By leveraging existing programmes, technology, 
and fostering community participation, India can 
make noteworthy progress towards zero 
hunger, food security and improved nutrition. 
Collaborative efforts across agriculture, 
livestock, education, and public distribution 
systems are essential to create a resilient and 
sustainable food system that can adapt to 
climate change, consumer preferences and 
ensure their well-being. This comprehensive 
strategy aligns with the Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs) and paves the way 
for a healthier and more prosperous future 
for India.
Food imports dependency & availability
35.
National Food Security Mission - Operational Guidelines, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, Ministry of Agriculture, 12th Five year plan, Accessed on 
13 February 2025 
36.
India’s Agriculture Trade 2023, Global Trade Research Initiative Report, December 2023 
Questions to consider:
?
How can the NRC support in designing a 
roadmap for ensuring pay disparities are 
lowered in the coming years?
?
What are considerations for the NRC to 
understand the market drivers for talent 
attraction?
KPMG in India contacts:
kpmg.com/in/socialmedia 
The information contained herein is of a general nature and is not intended to address the circumstances of any particular individual or entity. Although we 
endeavor to provide accurate and timely information, there can be no guarantee that such information is accurate as of the date it is received or that it will 
continue to be accurate in the future. No one should act on such information without appropriate professional advice after a thorough examination of the 
particular situation.
KPMG Assurance and Consulting Services LLP, Lodha Excelus, Apollo Mills Compound, NM Joshi Marg, Mahalaxmi, Mumbai - 400 011
Phone: +91 22 3989 6000, Fax: +91 22 3983 6000.
© 2025 KPMG Assurance and Consulting Services LLP, an Indian Limited Liability Partnership and a member firm of the KPMG global organisation of 
independent member firms affiliated with KPMG International Limited, a private English company limited by guarantee. All rights reserved.
The KPMG name and logo are trademarks used under license by the independent member firms of the KPMG global organisation. 
This document is for e-communication only.
kpmg.com/in 
Follow us on:
Access our latest insights 
on KPMG Insights Edge
Himanshu Rattan
Partner and Lead
Food, Agri & Allied Services
Government & Public Services
E: himanshurattan@kpmg.com
Nilachal Mishra
Partner and Head 
Government & Public Services
E: nilachalmishra@kpmg.com
Akhilesh Tuteja
Head 
Clients & Markets
E: atuteja@kpmg.com
