The future of quality 
in manufacturing
2   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
In today’s rapidly changing landscape, the quest for quality has gone beyond traditional  
bounds, evolving into a multifaceted concept that incorporates emerging technologies and 
shifting consumer expectations. As we approach a new era known as Quality 5.0, the future  
of excellence looks more dynamic and interconnected than ever before.
In the twenty-first century, Quality 4.0 has integrated Industry 4.0 technologies such as the 
internet of things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI) to optimise processes and ensure customer 
centricity. As quality continues to evolve, businesses have begun to reconsider whether their 
current quality systems will suffice. In addition to the existing Quality 4.0 systems, businesses 
may require a more comprehensive approach to meet the needs of various stakeholders such as 
customers, suppliers, employees, investors, and the community at large.
This article discusses the evolution of quality, the growing importance of Quality 5.0 and its 
implications for modern business practices. It looks into the skills needed by professionals to 
effectively navigate this transformation. It also outlines the key elements defining Quality 5.0 and 
provides insights into how these elements will influence organisational success. Finally, the article 
discusses the challenges associated with its implementation and makes recommendations to 
mitigate them.
3   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
Evolution of quality
To understand the implications of Quality 5.0, we must first examine how the concept of quality has changed 
over time. From the early days of industrial standards to today’s sophisticated, technology-driven approaches, 
each phase has been built on the previous one, setting the stage for the innovations and strategies that define 
Quality 5.0.
Figure 1: Evolution of quality
Future
Age of inspection
Walter Shewhart’s 
tools 
Agile working method
1990
2001
1986
1970
1962
1951
1938
1924
Time for 
Quality 5.0? 
1890
Quality 1.0
Quality 5.0
Quality 2.0
Quality 4.0
Quality 3.0
1890
1940
1995
2024
Six Sigma
Malcom Baldrige award
Quality circles
Just in time
Deming cycle
Organisational excellence
European Foundation for 
Quality Management model 
Toyota Production 
System
Ishikawa tools
Quality 
management
Juran Trilogy 
Source: PwC analysis
1. American Society of Quality. [Online] https://asq.org/quality-resources/history-of-quality?srsltid=AfmBOooIaI_y8RVjhUL6Jqeu2oZXLSpRTXO-
crK6Ig3RN3u3bYJuS4PQA
In Quality 1.0 (prior to 1890), quality was ensured through inspection. However, it focused primarily on achieving 
better productivity while neglecting cost reduction, waste elimination and worker safety. 
Quality 2.0 (1891–1940) witnessed the implementation of quality management systems and statistical quality 
control methods. However, the emphasis was primarily on internal indicators such as rework and scrap, rather 
than on customer satisfaction. 
The Third Industrial Revolution (Industry 3.0) introduced digital computers and automation, paving the way for 
Quality 3.0 (1941–1995), which began to use data to analyse costs and customer complaints and to incorporate 
consumer feedback into product development. The Juran Trilogy, quality circles, total quality management and 
Six Sigma are examples of key developments from this period. 
Quality 4.0 saw a shift towards a more dynamic, real-time, data-driven and technology-enabled approach 
that incorporated digital technologies such as IoT, advanced analytics and automation into manufacturing 
processes with the goal of improving product quality, reducing defects, increasing efficiency and ensuring 
compliance with standards.1
Quality 5.0
Quality 5.0 is a transformative approach that combines technological innovation and human insight to improve 
the overall standards of products and processes. It focuses on improving system adaptability to changing 
demands and market conditions by combining technology with human creativity and intelligence. It goes 
beyond traditional efficiency metrics to focus on employee satisfaction, creativity and workplace humanisation. 
It also emphasises sustainable practices and social responsibility, with the goal of improving quality of life for 
both employees and consumers while promoting a more sustainable and socially responsible future.
Adopting Quality 5.0 improves companies’ adaptability to changing market conditions and production 
demands. It increases employee satisfaction by creating a more engaging and human-centred working 
environment. Quality 5.0 ensures long-term viability and positions businesses for continued success in an 
increasingly dynamic marketplace by improving product quality and aligning with contemporary customer 
values and regulations.
4   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
5   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
Shifting skill sets and focus areas
Quality is evolving into a multifaceted discipline that encompasses many aspects of business. As these 
elements advance, the skill sets required of quality professionals shift. Professionals must focus on several 
key areas, including understanding business goals, improving collaboration and soft skills, and cultivating a 
continuous learning mindset.
Proficiency in emerging quality technologies, advanced data analytics and cybersecurity is becoming more 
valuable. On the other hand, dedicating a substantial amount of time to data management, data cleaning and 
filing regulatory compliances are becoming less important. 
These changes will undoubtedly have an impact on employee engagement, and it is the duty of management to 
map the skills required for the future of quality and assist employees in upskilling themselves.
Figure 2: Skills required by the quality function
Skill required by quality function
Then
Now
Future
Understanding business goals
Dedicating time to data handling and cleaning
Collaboration and boosting soft skills
Advanced data analytics
Cross-departmental expertise
Emerging quality technology proficiency
Problem identification
Continuous learning mindset
Knowledge of compliance environment
Filing regulatory compliances
Cybersecurity
Source: PwC analysis
6   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
Seven key elements shaping Quality 5.0
In order to remain competitive and satisfy changing expectations, companies must adopt a multidimensional 
approach to quality. To help companies with this process, we’ve identified seven important aspects that will 
shape Quality 5.0. Improving these areas will better prepare organisations for upcoming challenges:
Customer 
experience
Quality 
of life
Product 
quality 
Service 
quality
Process
quality
IT and data 
quality
Compliance 
quality
1
3
5
7
4
6
2
1. Product quality 
Ensuring good product quality is critical for customer satisfaction, brand reputation and operational success. A 
complete approach to product quality entails incorporating key interventions throughout a product’s lifecycle, 
from design to manufacturing to final inspection. Three key strategies in this aspect are design for quality (DfQ), 
real-time quality monitoring and predictive quality analytics.
DfQ: It prioritises quality considerations throughout the product design phase, emphasising issues 
such as reliability, manufacturability, ease of inspection, usage and maintenance. In the context of 
Quality 5.0, DfQ also embeds sustainability considerations and resource efficiency. This involves 
choosing materials with a lower environmental impact, using more efficient production methods, and 
planning for minimal energy consumption and waste generation throughout the product’s lifecycle. 
This proactive strategy improves overall product quality, lowers manufacturing costs, increases 
customer happiness and promotes environmental friendliness.
Real-time quality monitoring: Embedded sensors and data analytics allow for continuous monitoring 
of performance measures, helping early detection of quality concerns and permitting timely 
interventions.
Predictive quality analytics: It involves predicting and preventing quality concerns by analysing 
historical data and monitoring real-time performance. With the help of machine learning, this approach 
identifies patterns and abnormalities early on, allowing for proactive modifications to minimise faults 
and optimise production, ultimately lowering costs and improving product quality.
2. Service quality 
Service quality is defined as the capacity to meet or exceed client expectations by providing efficient and 
effective service. Today, this extends into elements such as personalised emotional engagement which foster 
a strong customer connection and satisfaction, as well as AI integration, which uses technologies such as 
robotic process automation (RPA), virtual assistants and chatbots to provide quick and accurate responses to 
customer requests. As a result, any approach to service quality must take into consideration these factors so as 
to provide a service experience that consistently satisfies client requests and increases overall satisfaction.
7   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
3. Process quality
Process quality now covers not just product performance, but also the environmental and social effect of 
the production or service delivery processes. With growing customer demand for sustainability and more 
environmental restrictions, firms are turning to environmental, social and governance (ESG) principles to 
decrease waste and carbon footprints in their processes.
By incorporating these concepts into their operational plans and decision-making processes, businesses can 
attempt to match their processes with sustainability goals while retaining high quality and efficiency.
4. Customer experience
The idea of customer experience has shifted from simply the purchasing experience to focusing on the overall 
user experience across the customer lifecycle. This starts from the point when the potential customer first 
learns about the product or service, evaluates the offerings, decides to make the purchase, and ends with 
keeping the customer satisfied and engaged post purchase. In this regard, immersive experiences such as 
virtual, augmented and mixed reality environments that provide spatial presence and sensory feedback are 
becoming increasingly important.
Furthermore, data privacy and responsible use of personal information are also increasingly important aspects 
in creating a high quality of experience (QoE).
5. IT and data quality
This entails utilising innovative technologies and processes to ensure the correctness, reliability and integrity of 
data across systems. This technique consists of several critical components:
Big data and cloud systems provide scalability and flexibility, making them suitable for managing, 
storing and processing large amounts of data. Cloud solutions allow for complete data quality checks 
across different and massive datasets that are not limited by physical infrastructure such as capacity 
of storage servers. These solutions also ensure access is restricted to authorised users and that the 
same data is consistently visible to all of them. 
Automated data quality assurance uses machine vision and other AI-powered inspection tools and 
testing equipment to improve quality control operations. These tools allow for precise and efficient 
data gathering and validation, which reduces the chances of recording incorrect data and thus 
improves overall quality.
Blockchain can be used by organisations to dramatically improve their quality assurance methods 
due to its transparency, immutability and decentralisation. A blockchain creates a clear, visible record 
of every stage in the manufacturing or service delivery process, fostering responsibility and trust 
among stakeholders. Its immutability ensures that all data linked to quality checks and compliance 
is kept intact and tamper proof, resulting in a credible audit log. Furthermore, the decentralised 
structure of blockchain decreases the danger of single points of failure while increasing security 
by dispersing data across a network of nodes. These characteristics allow organisations to more 
efficiently evaluate and validate quality assurance processes, track and trace items across the supply 
chain, and maintain correct compliance records, thus increasing overall quality control.
6. Quality of life
To remain competitive, businesses must take a holistic approach that connects system and process changes 
with the goal of improving quality of life not only for their employees, but also for their customers and the 
community in general. This includes investing in employee well-being to increase job satisfaction and overall 
happiness, as well as ensuring that their products and services meet functional requirements as well as provide 
increased comfort, simplicity of use and hassle-free ownership. As customers begin to appreciate these 
additional benefits, organisations must adjust their strategy to this new dimension to create a more positive 
environment, increase customer loyalty and have a significant impact on the community.
7. Compliance quality
Compliance quality has shifted from a focus on simply meeting regulatory requirements to incorporating 
regulatory technology (RegTech) solutions. Emerging technologies and a commitment to sustainable practices 
have driven this shift by making possible advanced automation, real-time monitoring and risk management. 
RegTech tools help monitor regulatory changes, ensuring compliance with evolving standards by automating 
compliance procedures and reducing human error.
As a result, organisations can not only streamline their compliance activities, but also improve their overall 
efficiency, agility and resilience in an increasingly complex regulatory landscape, thus paving the path for long-
term success.
8   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
9   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
Challenges in implementation
Adopting Quality 5.0, which integrates advanced technologies while focusing on a human-centric approach to 
quality management, poses several challenges.
Figure 3: Challenges in implementing Quality 5.0
Challenges of 
Quality 5.0 
implementation
Leadership challenges with
change management
Shortage of talent and
people with digital skills
Lack of quality culture and
fragmentation of quality data
Inability of the organisation
to operate as an integrated 
system
Outdated 
systems/infrastructure and 
cost of updating them
Data security 
and privacy
To address these challenges, organisations can:
•	
create a clear strategy roadmap, including implementation phases and regular reviews to manage the 
transition
•	
use change management principles to support the organisation and its people through the transition
•	
develop user-friendly solutions that fit with current skill levels and invest in training to effectively utilise data 
to generate better insights 
•	
build a strong quality culture with buy-in from all levels of the organisation and address quality concerns by 
developing data enablers for successful compilation and analysis
•	
conduct frequent security assessments and apply data protection procedures to identify and address 
system vulnerabilities and operational hazards 
•	
encourage collaboration among stakeholders across the value chain through open communication, 
knowledge exchange and collective problem solving to overcome interoperability concerns
•	
begin by identifying and testing small, cost-effective use cases, then scale up with more customised 
solutions as needed.
10   PwC   |   The future of quality in manufacturing
Recommendation: Follow a bottom-up approach to ensure successful adoption and employee buy-in.
PwC India assists clients in adopting innovative methods to implement Quality 5.0. This approach begins 
with assessing the current state, envisioning the desired future state, identifying opportunities, selecting 
appropriate technologies, establishing data infrastructure, integrating processes, and finally managing the 
change effectively.
Figure 4: PwC’s approach for successful implementation
As-is assessment
Identifying opportunities, roadmapping and preparing timelines
Implementation
Assess 
current state
Technology 
selection
Data 
infrastructure
Process 
integration
Change 
management
Envision target 
state and identify 
opportunities
•	
As-is assessment: This involves evaluating existing quality management systems through stakeholder 
interviews, site visits (sampling and testing processes, integration with enterprise resource planning [ERP] 
system) and data analysis, thus setting the baseline for future comparison.
•	
Envisioning target state: During this phase, the emphasis shifts to imagining the future state of the quality 
management system. This includes establishing target states in Quality 5.0, ranging from foundational to 
advanced and best-in-class. Initiatives are then developed to bridge the gap between the existing situation 
and the intended future state.
•	
Technology selection: Here, we discuss how various Industry 4.0 technologies, such as IoT, AI and cloud 
computing, can be improved by including human, environmental and societal factors, and assist in 
selecting the best options.
•	
Data infrastructure: During this phase, we work towards ensuring a robust data infrastructure is in place to 
collect, store and analyse quality-related data.
•	
Process integration: To ensure seamless data flow and operational efficiency, quality processes must be 
integrated with other operational systems. This involves aligning quality management systems with ERP, 
customer relationship management (CRM), and other supply chain management systems, enabling data to 
move seamlessly across different functions. Such integration facilitates real-time updates, reduces manual 
data entry and enhances overall process efficiency.
•	
Change management: Successful implementation of new quality management principles necessitates 
effective change management. This includes designing communication strategies for employees, providing 
training and support to help them adjust to new systems and processes, and garnering employee buy-in 
through participation and feedback. Change management ensures that the transition to the new quality 
management system is smooth and that staff are engaged and motivated to accept the improvements.
PwC, with its proprietary quality management framework, is uniquely positioned to combine traditional quality 
management methods with Industry 5.0 tools to enhance operational efficiency, drive innovation, and achieve 
sustainable and superior quality outcomes, thereby enabling businesses to gain a competitive edge in today’s 
evolving market.
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms in 
151 countries with over 360,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax 
services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. 
Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2025 PwC. All rights reserved.
Contact us
Prahalad Chandrasekharan
Executive Director, Operations and Management Consulting
Email: prahalad.chandrasekharan@pwc.com
Contributors
Prahalad Chandrasekharan, supported by Ramya RA, Shambo Bhattacharya, 
Rohan Deb Roy, and Karun Kannan
Editorial support
Dion D’Souza
Design
Kirtika Saxena
pwc.in
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or 
CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which 
is a separate legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed 
by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. 
Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. 
Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are 
entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this 
publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2025 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved.
KS/January 2024-M&C 43263
