Powering automation  
with agents
Powering 
automation  
with agents
This report will provide leaders, automation and AI 
practitioners with a balanced view into the world of 
APA, highlighting its applications and benefits and 
offering practical guidance on aspects of governance.
3   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Throughout human history, there have 
been various turning points that have 
reshaped the world around us. Just 
like the Industrial Revolution and the 
Information Age permanently changed 
the way the world works, we find 
ourselves pivoting into an age that can 
transform our future. This is the dawn 
of a new era and a novel approach to 
automation called agentic powered 
automation (APA). This innovation 
is all set to transform industries and 
revolutionise the future of work as it will 
lead to the deployment of intelligent 
agents alongside the human workforce. 
The transformative power of these 
digital workers comes from their ability 
to understand their environment and 
make autonomous decisions, with 
minimal human supervision. This 
enables them to not only handle routine 
rule-based tasks, but also learn, adapt 
and make complex decisions easily. 
At the same time, they have the ability 
to offer human-like responses, thus 
bringing greater efficiency to existing 
processes. Given the current economic 
and other significant challenges that 
modern organisations are faced with, 
there is a heightened need for efficiency 
and sustainable growth. 
Hence, these artificial intelligence 
(AI) agents are emerging as catalysts 
of change since they leverage large 
language models (LLMs) that give 
them the unique ability to gain 
contextual understanding and offer 
better solutions.
The Government of India’s strategy 
highlights the shift towards AI, with its 
plan for developing its own graphics 
processing unit (GPU), building a 
domestic foundational AI model and 
establishing a Centre of Excellence 
in Artificial Intelligence, underscoring 
its commitment to advancing AI 
capabilities as a bedrock for Viksit 
Bharat 2047. Furthermore, PwC’s 
28th Annual Global CEO Survey: India 
perspective reveals that a majority of 
Indian CEOs are poised to integrate 
AI into their technology platforms and 
business processes, highlighting AI’s 
critical role in business transformation 
and increased profitability.1 
Based on our extensive experience 
of working with various global 
organisations, we have put together this 
white paper to help organisations who 
wish to harness the power of APA.
Vivek Prasad
Markets Leader 
PwC India
Sumit Srivastav
Partner and Leader, 
Intelligent Automation 
PwC India
Foreword
1	 https://www.pwc.in/assets/pdfs/publications/ceo-survey/2025/28th-annual-global-ceo-survey-india-perspective.pdf
4   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Introduction
Defining agentic powered automation (APA)
As AI-powered automation technologies continue 
to evolve, we are seeing a paradigm shift from 
mere task automation to innovative systems. The 
intelligent automation landscape today consists of 
the robotic process automation (RPA), intelligent 
document processing (IDP), conversational AI and 
chatbots, analytics, and data integration through AI. 
With these capabilities, organisations have been able 
to automate complex workflows with human in the 
loop for decision making. Intelligent automation has 
unlocked productivity and efficiency at scale with 
next-gen integrated solutions.
At the same time, the advent of generative AI (GenAI) 
and large language models (LLMs) has enabled 
the democratisation of AI capabilities. With its 
enhanced decision-making capabilities, contextual 
understanding, localised data training and ability to 
transform customer experience, GenAI has been 
identified as a game changer for driving innovation 
in organisations. 
The transformative potential of GenAI, particularly 
in enhancing productivity, streamlining business 
processes, and reshaping value chains across 
industries, is reflected through increased 
organisational spending on GenAI.2 
APA marries the capabilities of intelligent automation 
and the GenAI-powered agents. Within this 
framework, the agents act as the brain of the 
system, understanding user requests and planning 
a set of actions to fulfil the request. Tools such as 
intelligent automation, APIs and automation scripts 
act as the hands, executing the actions through an 
orchestration layer. The APA framework is able to 
leverage multiple goal-oriented agents through multi-
agent orchestration, unlocking complex workflows. 
The agents also validate the output at each stage 
and have the ability to reflect on the output, learn 
from feedback and heal. By leveraging GenAI 
agents and automation, APA can deliver end-to-
end, context-aware, scalable automation which is 
adaptable to dynamic user needs.
Source: PwC analysis
2	 https://www.weforum.org/stories/2024/01/genai-will-be-worth-trillions-heres-a-roadmap-for-harnessing-it/
APA can…
Understand goals
Plan actions
Shortlist tools
Create workflows
Take decisions
Execute actions
Collaborate
User interaction
Planning and 
action
Reflection and 
self-healing
• Communicate through chat, audio and video for 
versatile user engagement.
• Perform sentiment and context analysis to provide 
empathetic and context-aware responses.
• Tailor interactions to individual user preferences.
• Understand the goal and plan the set of  
actions to achieve it.
• Map the skills/tools required to complete  
these actions.
• Orchestrate and execute individual actions  
using skills/tools.
• Fulfil complex goals through multi-agent orchestration.
• Review the output against the set goals.
• Refine actions based on user feedback on the 
generated output.
• Review workflows and find areas of improvement.
Lever
Overview
5   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Key features of Agents
The agents, differentiated by their 
advanced human-like reasoning and 
interaction capabilities, are transforming 
the retail, finance, manufacturing, 
healthcare, transportation and energy 
sectors, among others.3 Their key 
standout features are as follows: 
Source: PwC analysis
3	 https://www.pwc.com/m1/en/publications/documents/2024/agentic-ai-the-new-frontier-in-genai-an-executive-
playbook.pdf
Autonomy
Execute operations independently by leveraging 
programming, learning ability and user inputs to make 
informed decisions and carry out tasks without any 
human or external intervention.
Goal-oriented behaviour
Achieve outcomes and specific objectives by optimisng 
the actions and decision-making processes involved 
for task execution.
Environment interaction
Ensure tasks are executed in alignment with 
goals and environment conditions by interacting 
with surroundings, track changes in real time and 
adapt accordingly.
Learning capability
Bring efficiency and accuracy in responses by 
utilising intelligence, self-reflection and self-
improvement capabilities.
Workflow orchestration and execution
Centrally orchestrate the actions required to achieve 
goals. These actions may utilise different skills and tools 
to execute a workflow.
Multi-agent and system conversation
Coordinate frictionlessly between multiple agents 
through integration with external tools such as email, 
search engine, code and script executors.
Agentic automation represents a significant breakthrough 
in the space of digitisation. Powered by AI and with 
human-like cognitive abilities, autonomous agents are 
designed to act independently while learning from their 
actions and improving decision making over time, enabling 
end-to-end value chains and processes that to continue 
to be reimagined. Hence, as organisations deploy agents 
work alongside their human workforce and disrupt value 
chains, we are looking at an era that can revolutionise 
industries and forever change the way humans interact 
with technology.
Mohib Yousufani
Partner, Global Leader 
Transformation and Digital
Strategy&
PwC US
6   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Augmenting human capabilities with agents
Traditionally, repetitive processes were passed on from humans to bots for automation, making it a human-led, 
bot-driven process. But the emergence of LLMs and large multimodal models (LMMs) has paved the way for AI 
agents with a deeper understanding of context, substantially improving the effectiveness of performing natural 
language processing tasks. AI models have thus enabled better engagement with natural language, leading to a 
state where AI agents will work alongside humans given that they possess similar capabilities.
While APA aims to reduce the need for human intervention in routine tasks, the future will emphasise a symbiotic 
relationship between humans and AI. This collaboration will leverage the strengths of both, with AI handling 
data-intensive, repetitive tasks and humans focusing on strategic, creative, and interpersonal activities. AI will 
augment human capabilities, providing insights and recommendations that aid decision making. This partnership 
will not only enhance productivity but also ensure that automation serves to amplify human potential rather 
than replace it.
People, agents and bots in the APA landscape
Source: PwC analysis
Agents
• 
Independent workers 
powered by GenAI to reduce 
dependency on humans
• 
Goal-oriented behaviour 
and context aware decision 
making
• 
Most suited for tasks which 
involve frequent environment 
changes, thus requiring 
adaptability
• 
Utilise the tools and skills 
at their disposal through 
context and action to 
accomplish goals
• 
Agentic guardrails and 
orchestration will govern 
the agents’ autonomy and 
access to systems and 
environment.
Automation/bots
• 
Pre-defined actions for 
rule-based and predictable 
processes
• 
Complete routine tasks with 
high reliability and efficiency
• 
Triggered by agents 
for completion of the 
individual actions
• 
	Act as hands of the agent 
to interact with enterprise 
applications
• 
Plug-and-play capabilities to 
operate with multiple agents
People
• 
Make faster and more 
informed decisions by 
working alongside agents
• 
Agents take on repetitive, 
mundane tasks to allow 
humans to focus on value-
add activities
• 
Exception handling for cases 
which cannot be resolved 
by agents
• 
Provide feedback on the 
outputs produced by agents 
and enable them to learn
• 
Carry out a supervisory role, 
being decision makers and 
organisational leaders
7   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Let’s have a quick look at the skills of these agents:
While humans posses creativity, emotional intelligence, contextual and situational adaptability, empathy and 
ethical reasoning, social and cultural intuition, agentic AI brings high-speed execution, scalability, accuracy in 
repetitive tasks, 24/7 availability without fatigue, and cost efficiency@scale.
Brain
Utilise experience, emotional 
intelligence and ethical judgment 
for nuanced decision making
Eyes and ears
Visual cues, body language, 
interpret emotions and respond 
to environmental cues
Speech
Empathetic communication 
through spoken and written 
language for relationship building
Heart
Moral reasoning and empathy 
to make decisions, considering 
individual circumstances and 
ethical implications
Hands
Physically perform tasks 
requiring manual intervention, 
adaptability and ability to deal 
with unforeseen challenges
Cognitive processing and 
decision making
Leverage GenAI to analyse 
data, identify patterns, gain 
insights and solve problems
Information perception and analysis
Use technologies like vision to extract 
and analyse information from text, 
docs, speech, image and videos
Interaction and Engagement
Use multi-nodal models for interaction 
with employees, instant response to 
queries and information dissemination
Ethical judgement and empathy
Operate within predefined ethical 
guidelines and compliance frameworks
Task execution and action skills
Employ RPA, workflows, automation 
scripts, APIs, etc., to execute tasks 
swiftly and accurately
As the adoption of AI continues to progress rapidly and the future is headed 
towards a blended workforce, organisations must think about integrating 
agents as a fundamental part of their workforce strategy. Those who 
transform their operating model to manage a blended workforce are better 
positioned to capitalise on the potential of APA.
Shaun Ryan
Partner, Advisory, E2E Process Transformation Leader, PwC Australia
8   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Key components of APA: Enterprise ecosystem and agentic 
workflow
APA represents a major leap towards greater autonomy and intelligence. Agents can foresee problems and 
take preventive measures and proactive actions without a need for human intervention. Agents also have self-
monitoring capabilities, ensuring continuous process improvement. Advanced agents can analyse their own 
performance, learn and improve over time. In this new era of APA, organisations can progressively include 
innovation, efficiency and productivity at each step of a business process, with the goal of achieving autonomy 
in any workflow execution.
The functionalities of agents primarily consist of the following key components:
Orchestration
Orchestration is at the core of any agent workflow 
where multiple agents contribute to a series 
of actions and tasks that need to be stitched 
together. This begins with understanding the goal 
or objective of the workflow, followed by planning 
of all tasks and actions that need to be performed 
to achieve it. These tasks are then delegated 
amongst multiple agents as each of them will 
preserve a context of the task to be carried out. 
This is approach is similar to having specialised 
skills within a workstream. 
Agent execution 
The sequence of steps in the plan are executed 
step by step, in a hierarchical manner, parallelly 
or a combination of both. There may also be 
some handshakes between agents that are 
interdependent on the output from the previous 
state. An important step during execution by the 
agents is human feedback or human in the loop 
to provide inputs. The execution can happen on a 
server or in a serverless application.
Workflow construction 
Workflow steps are constructed against the plan 
which is prepared as explained in the previous 
step. During this activity, pre-built tools such as 
API integration, RPA bots, vision capabilities and 
browser search are leveraged to frame actions, 
and this may involve specialised agents (skills). 
In case these agents do not exist, the intelligence 
from LLMs may enable the agents to generate 
them at runtime, be it for writing code, analysing 
data from documents, creating compliance 
reports, providing a recommendation, etc.
Reflection and healing 
Agents in APA can exhibit self-learning and 
self-healing capabilities. These agents can work 
together to autonomously set goals, explore 
environments and refine actions based on 
feedback. They continuously monitor performance, 
using feedback loops and iterative mechanisms to 
resolve issues independently and adapt to process 
changes. By reviewing their workflows and finding 
areas for improvement, these agents get better 
and more efficient over time.
Successful implementation of agentic AI depends on combining advanced 
technologies with human creativity and judgement. Effective data management 
is key, as it empowers AI to reach its full potential. Achieving true success relies 
on strategically blending these elements to transform business models and drive 
sustainable growth.
Mark Allderman
Partner, PwC South Africa
Source: PwC analysis
9   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
APA in action
Source: PwC analysis
Data sources,
systems and
knowledge 
base
User 
interaction
and 
feedback
Agent
orchestration 
Understanding 
and planning, 
task breakdown 
and delegation
Skill construction  
Skill
execution  
Response/
output validation
Reflection and
healing 
Memory
+ 
knowledge base
Else
Expected
output? 
Result
Skill exists
Skill doesn’t exist
Workflow
4
3
2
1
Real-world use cases
APA has unlocked advanced capabilities for 
achieving end-to-end automation and driving 
transformation across business functions. By 
leveraging GenAI, APA can deliver enhanced 
decision making and business insights, drive 
efficiency, and transform user experience. 
Agents are driving productivity and efficiency 
gains across functions, right from streamlining 
repetitive tasks in finance or supply chain 
operations to delivering personalised experiences 
in sales and marketing. The ability of agents to 
adapt, learn and manage complex workflows 
makes them critical for any business to solve 
modern business problems through innovation. 
10   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Sample use cases across business functions
Source: PwC analysis
AI agents are set to transform industry landscapes faster than ever. With 
agentic automation, we will see significant advancements in quality, accuracy 
and productivity across sectors, especially as AI agents will begin to play a 
crucial role in filling the gaps in areas where human expertise is either lacking 
or in high demand.
Katrin Hamann 
Partner, PwC Germany 
Finance and accounting
Invoice processing agent
• Extract and validate data from invoices, and 
then post it automatically into ERP systems.
• Handle errors through workflows, ensuring 
speed and accuracy in invoice processing.
Accounts payable agent
• Track unpaid invoices and send automated 
reminders to vendors. Escalate overdue payments 
to respective teams.
• Generate comprehensive ageing reports, improving 
visibility and timely follow-ups by the agent.
Expense reconciliation agent
• Check employee expenses against company 
policies and flag any discrepancies for review.
• Automate approval workflows and prepare detailed 
reconciliation reports for review and action.
Cash flow management agent
• Track incoming and outgoing cash flows to ensure 
sufficient liquidity for business operations and 
thresholds.
• Forecast cash flow trends and provide actionable 
insights to aid financial planning and budgeting.
Supply chain
Demand forecasting agent
• Collect and analyse historical sales, customer 
trends, seasonality, etc., to forecast demand.
• Share actionable insights through continuous 
monitoring and refining predictions to improve 
accuracy.
Inventory visibility agent
• Provide real-time visibility of inventory across 
warehouses and in transit through interactive 
conversational agent.
• Provide critical inventory alerts and interactive 
dashboards view for stockouts or excess inventory.
Supplier onboarding agent
• Automate the collection and verification of 
supplier information, including contracts and legal 
documents.
• Streamline the onboarding process by integrating 
suppliers into master data/procurement systems 
efficiently.
Returns processing agent
• Manage returns process and addition back to 
inventory, flag any issues and track resolutions.
• Automate quality checks alerts, refund approvals 
and restocking processes to enhance efficiency.
11   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Source: PwC analysis
Sales and marketing
Sales development agent
• Fetch potential leads from databases and 
enrich leads by analysing company size and 
valid contact details.
• Send personalised automated outreach 
communications and create follow-up tasks in 
CRM for non-responding leads.
Brand monitoring agent
• Suggest keywords for monitoring (brand, product) 
and gather mentions across selected platforms.
• Automate triggers for cases with keywords ‘scam’ 
or ‘fraud’ and visual summaries of sentiment 
trends, mentions and issues.
SEO optimisation agent
• Analyse website content for keywords and 
performance. Recommend improvements to meta 
tags, backlinks and structure.
• Track rankings and provide reports on SEO 
performance to improve search engine visibility and 
drive organic traffic.
Customer feedback agent
• Gather data from surveys, reviews and social media 
mentions. Perform sentiment analysis to gauge 
customer intent.
• Provide pointed insights for improving products and 
services to enhance customer retention and brand 
reputation.
IT department
Service desk agent
• Automate sentiment analysis and service ticket 
creation for user queries with appropriate 
priority levels.
• Generate query responses for FAQs, trigger 
automated workflows or loop human in for 
unresolved requests.
System monitoring agent
• Continuously monitor IT infrastructure (servers, 
networks, applications) for anomalies, 
performance issues and downtime. 
• Alert the team to take corrective actions 
and suggest proactive actions and disaster 
recovery plans.
Asset management agent
• Track IT assets throughout their lifecycle, managing 
inventory, allocation and compliance with 
organisational policies. 
• Provide maintenance schedules for IT assets and 
application licences.
Disaster recovery agent
• Monitor systems for potential disasters, trigger 
recovery protocols and minimise impact by 
automating failover processes.
• Regularly test and update disaster recovery plans to 
address risks and ensure readiness.
12   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Human resources
Talent search agent 
• Help recruiters find the best resumes by 
automating job description (JD) creation 
process and smart sourcing from internal 
portals and external websites.
• Rank candidates by relevance, considering 
skills, experience and location.
Employee experience agent
• Act as a virtual HR assistant to address employee 
queries on policies, benefits, leave balances and 
other HR-related processes.
• Send reminders for upcoming deadlines (e.g. 
benefits enrolment, training sessions) to enhance 
employee engagement.
Background verification agent
• Collect and validate documents such as ID proofs, 
educational certificates and employment history.
• Initiate background checks, send notifications and 
follow up with BGV team.
Full and final settlement agent
• Automate final clearance, including salary, bonuses, 
leave encashments, deductions, assets and IT 
system deactivation.
• Administer exit interview questionnaire, collect 
feedback and perform sentiment analysis.
Source: PwC analysis
Talent search agent
Identifying the right candidate for a role is critical to successful position fulfilment. The hiring process starts from 
the creation of an accurate, organisation-specific and well-defined JD for the given role. Currently, the talent 
search process relies heavily on manual efforts, including creating JDs, sourcing and shortlisting candidates by 
screening resumes, and scheduling interviews. Key challenges during this process include: 
APA can transform this process by leveraging agents 
and automation and orchestration capabilities.
Action1:
Action2:
Action3:
Action4:
JD creation – using pre-built templates, JD creator 
agent to draft JDs based on requisition details, role and 
required experience
Candidate sourcing – RPA and API-based tools to 
post job openings on relevant portals
Resume screening and comparative analysis –
GenAI-based intelligence matching to identify most 
relevant profiles and perform comparative analysis
End-to-end Automation – by orchestrating the entire 
process from JD creation to candidate shortlisting
High manual workload 
– creating JDs, sourcing 
candidate profiles and 
screening resumes 
requires extensive efforts
Inefficiency in matching 
– only keyword search 
may result in irrelevant 
candidates being 
sourced
Subjectivity in 
decision making 
– may result 
in inconsistent 
evaluations
Scalability challenge – 
for a mass recruitment 
drive, it can become 
very laborious to source 
correct profiles
13   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
The talent search agent accelerates the hiring process by improving speed, accuracy and scalability. This agent 
reduces the time-to-hire, enhancing recruiter productivity and ensuring consistent decision making without 
recruiter bias. Through automation, the agent allows recruiters to focus on strategic initiatives such as candidate 
engagement, resulting in an efficient talent acquisition process.
As-is talent search flow
Agentic talent search workflow
Hiring requisition to JD creation:
Collaborates with the hiring 
manager to define the role, 
responsibilities and qualifications, 
then drafts a JD. 
The JD is refined for clarity and 
alignment with organisational 
standards before approval.
Smart sourcing:
Uses tools like an application 
tracking system, internal job 
portals, and external job platforms 
to source potential candidates. 
Optimises search criteria using 
keywords and filters to identify the 
best-fit resumes quickly.
Screening and shortlisting:
Recruiter reviews the 
resumes, matching them 
against the JD, and 
shortlists candidates based 
on qualifications and 
experience for the next steps 
in the hiring process.
Gen-AI powered 
JD creator skill/agent 
Business user sends 
requisition request to HR  
Candidates 
apply to the jobs 
Create first cut JD
Agent sources
relevant profiles 
Agent posts the 
opening on external 
job platforms 
IDP + NLP-
based skill agent 
Find best-fit
resumes as
per JD
RPA + API-based 
skill agent
Perform comparative
analysis of candidates
and recommend best fit   
8
Business shares 
feedback on recommended
candidates back to agent
Recruiter
Recruiter
Interview
scheduler agent
JD creation process
Candidate profile sourcing
Comparative analysis of profiles
Interview scheduling and feedback
Suggest modifications
/approve JD 
Agent 
orchestration
Bot sends shortlisted 
resumes to business   
10
9
11
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
14   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Traditional HR model  
(human workforce)
Future HR model  
(human workforce + agents)
Reporting,
core business
Strategy
and insight   
Transaction processing
Reporting, core
business 
Strategy and insight 
Transactions
processing
agents 
Reporting
agents
Insights
   agents 
Transaction
   processing 
HR roles of today vs tomorrow
Screening and recruitment
• Screen and identify talent.
• Schedule interviews and work on onboarding 
selected candidates.
Employee experience
• Plan employee engagement and team-building 
activities.
• Gather insights through employee surveys.
Employee performance management
• Define performance goals and evaluate  
employees against them.
• Define feedback structure. 
HR administration and compliance
• Ensure compliance with local rules and laws.
• Establish processes for payroll and benefits 
management
Learning and development
• Plan employee training activities.
• Chart development plans across  
organisational levels.
Automated screening and onboarding
• Perform automated screening and shortlisting of 
candidates.
• Schedule and conduct initial assessments.
Personalised employee engagement
• Provide personalised 24/7 employee support and 
handle queries.
Effective performance management
• Track KPIs in real time.
• Automate feedback loop and goal-setting 
mechanism.
Automated HR administration and compliance
• Automate monitoring and reporting.
• Provide self-service payroll and benefits 
management portal.
Personalised learning and development
• Personalise training recommendations.
• Conduct interactive training sessions.
Human roles in HR today 
Agent capabilities in HR tomorrow
15   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Governance in the agentic AI landscape
As more organisations turn to APA to enhance efficiency and drive innovation, it is crucial to address the 
associated risks and ethical considerations, to ensure responsible implementation and sustainable success. 
PwC emphasises that responsible AI practices are key to mitigating risks and building trust among stakeholders.4 
This means setting up robust governance frameworks, ensuring transparency and fairness, and aligning with 
regulatory requirements to navigate the complexities of adopting APA. 
Here are the key risk and ethical considerations to keep in mind when implementing APA: 
A robust governance 
framework 
enables ethical AI 
implementation
Establishing a robust 
governance framework for 
ethical AI implementation 
requires defining clear 
accountability and developing 
comprehensive ethical 
guidelines. Measures to 
safeguard data privacy include 
encryption, relevant access 
permissions and frequent 
inspection. 
Transparency and 
explainability are 
essential for building 
trust in AI systems 
Ensuring algorithm transparency 
involves maintaining 
comprehensive documentation 
of APA models and detailing 
the data sources, training 
processes, and decision-making 
criteria. This is essential for 
transparency and auditing 
purposes.
In the race to the future, organisations need to find a balance between innovation 
and compliance. While AI agents can transform the way we work, they can also 
pose novel risks that humans may be unaware of. Hence, as we prepare for a 
possible world where AI agents will become a part of the larger workforce, we 
must tread with caution and consider not only the technical limitations but also 
the ethical concerns and wider societal impact often associated with the level of 
autonomy with which the AI agents are being designed.
Sudipta Ghosh 
Data and Analytics Leader, PwC India 
4&5   https://www.pwc.in/assets/pdfs/genai-strategy-from-ideation-to-adoption.pdf
Regulatory compliance 
and adherence to 
industry standards can 
mitigate legal risks 
Conducting regular compliance 
audits is essential to ensure 
that APA systems adhere to 
relevant data protection laws, 
industry-specific regulations 
and ethical guidelines, thereby 
mitigating legal risks.
For more information, refer to the risk, regulation and sustainability section of PwC’s thought leadership on 
‘GenAI strategy: From ideation to adoption’.5
16   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
Looking ahead
There is a definitive shift from human-led, manual 
processes to AI-powered systems where autonomous 
agents are handling tasks alongside their human 
counterparts with greater speed and precision. This 
transformation is not only expected to deliver cost benefits 
for businesses but also unlock newer revenue channels and 
growth opportunities that will allow businesses to deliver 
services faster and at a much larger scale.
However, as agents become increasingly autonomous in 
their decision making and actions, it can lead to newer risks 
and challenges that businesses will have to plan for. For 
instance, HR as a function will have to evolve as it goes on 
to manage a workforce that includes humans and agents. It 
will require a completely different set of skills to manage a 
blended workforce while devising methods to source, build 
and measure human talent. As agents autonomously carry 
out all routine and repetitive work, organisations will need 
to prepare humans to assume high-skill roles.
Additionally, since agents can be partly/fully autonomous, 
they require human supervision. Organisations will have to 
balance the need to innovate, the cost of innovation and 
the expected ROI as they deploy these agents. They will 
need to create both quantitative and qualitative methods 
to measure human-agent team performance. This will 
also need to be followed up with further development of 
governance models to manage organisational and societal 
risks. Hence, to enable continuous innovation, leaders need 
to develop a well-rounded responsible AI framework.
17   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
18   |    PwC  Powering automation with agents
How PwC can help
There is no doubt that AI is becoming ingrained in the way 
businesses operate, compete and sustain themselves 
for the future. Our technology solutions are designed to 
speed up your transformation, delivering value at scale. 
We will help you redefine the future, reimagine your current 
business model and build agentic automation solutions at 
scale. Our team of specialists can help you innovate faster, 
helping you can reduce your time to market and deliver 
enhanced customer experiences. Finally, we do all this 
responsibly while helping you manage possible risks.
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms 
in 151 countries with over 360,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory 
and tax services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal 
entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2025 PwC. All rights reserved.
Mehvash Khan
Tarun Singaravelan
Gopika E Nair
Piyush Bule
Lokeshwaran Maheswaran
Contributors
Sumit Srivastav
Partner & Leader, Intelligent Automation
PwC India
sumit.srivastav@pwc.com
Mahesh Parab
Partner
PwC India
mahesh.parab@pwc.com
Ritesh Jain
Partner
PwC India
ritesh.k.jain@pwc.com
Sagar Kothe
Executive Director
PwC India
sagar.kothe@pwc.com
Hariprasad Gajapathy
Executive Director
PwC India
hariprasad.gajapathy@pwc.com
Contact us
Shardul Raut
Jasnain Singh
Akhilesh Shinde
Disha Thadani
Hariprasad Gajapathy
Mahesh Parab
Sumit Srivastav
Deepak Kumar
Arun Singh
pwc.in
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or CIN : 
U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which is a separate 
legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed by 
PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. Any 
opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. Readers of this 
publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are entirely responsible, based 
on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this publication in respect of the 
information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2025 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved. 
HS/February 2025 - M&C
