Quality measures and standards 
March 2025
for transitioning to value-based 
healthcare in India
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
3
Table of contents
25
06
How technology can act as an enabler for VBHC
06
01
Introduction
05
18
Defining quality measures and standards 
09
02
An overview of VBHC’s adoption
16
04
Building a foundation for VBHC's adoption in India
14
03
The need for transitioning to a VBHC model
Challenges in adopting VBHC in India
07
31
33
08
The road ahead 
36
09
Conclusion
37
10
Glossary
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
4
Preface 
Arnab Basu 
Advisory Leader
PwC India
Value based healthcare(VBHC) is the cornerstone of modern healthcare and is integral for establishing an efficient and 
effective healthcare system.
There’s been a recent shift in focus towards VBHC since earlier the focus was solely around providing better value and 
outcomes for healthcare services. VBHC prioritises patient outcomes and cost efficiency, shifting away from the 
traditional fee-for-service model which provides services based on the quantity of services provided. In recent times, the 
government has been making efforts to integrate the value-based healthcare concept into the core of healthcare delivery 
system. These efforts aim to establish enhanced quality of care, cost effective healthcare solutions and improved 
patient satisfaction.
VBHC’s implementation in India can offer a transformative approach to address the challenges in Indian healthcare such 
as escalating health costs, poor health outcomes, inefficient allocation of resources and high levels of patient 
dissatisfaction. By prioritising patient outcomes over volume of services, VBHC can help organisations align their 
services with growing demand for cost effective, efficient and non-discriminatory care.
In a diverse and a largely populated country like India, where efficient healthcare access still remains challenging, 
particularly in rural areas, VBHC can offer a promising avenue for significant improvements. By focusing on initiatives 
around incentivising the providers to focus on chronic disease management and patient-centered care, VBHC can 
address many pressing challenges in Indian healthcare.
As the global healthcare landscape gears up for embracing the adoption of value-based healthcare, India’s healthcare 
sector is also at the forefront of this transformation. This paper aims to provide a roadmap to facilitate the transition to 
VBHC to help the Indian healthcare system in adopting VBHC and improving the outcomes of the healthcare 
sector’s endeavours. 
Dr Rana Mehta
Healthcare Leader 
PwC India
VBHC has tremendous potential to enhance the quality of care and generate value for healthcare organisations.
Some of these potential benefits include:
•
improved patient health outcomes
•
reduction in overall healthcare costs
•
increased patient satisfaction
•
enhanced resource management and efficiency.
VBHC has the capacity to transform the healthcare industry in India, enabling physicians to provide superior care and 
treatment to patients. With the implementation of VBHC in India, healthcare providers will be incentivised through the 
VBHC payment models to improve patient outcomes and efficiency, while payers will focus on aligning reimbursement 
models with quality care metrics, ultimately leading to cost savings and enhanced patient satisfaction. This, in turn, could 
provide better accessibility and affordability for patients and help in the goal of providing universal healthcare – an 
essential building block for the country’s economic progress. This report highlights the various nuances of VBHC, the 
various quality standards and measures for an effective VBHC model and how technology will act as a driver for the 
entire transition. 
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
5
1 https://www.india.gov.in/spotlight/union-budget-2025-2026
Angana Guha Roy Chowdhury
Assistant Director General 
BCC&I
Advanced healthcare has increased life expectancy and the probability to recover from critical health conditions. 
However, with advanced procedures and medicines along with factors like higher equipment cost, limited infrastructure 
and professionals with increased demand for healthcare services, healthcare has become expensive. 
Since the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 3 was established to ensure healthy lives and well-being 
for all people at all ages, it is important to provide quality healthcare available to the last mile. While differential 
healthcare delivery, based on location and affordability creates barriers to standardised quality healthcare, delivering 
quality care is also dependent on reliable data based on which measures, solutions and innovations may be aligned.
Insurance provided both by the Government and the private sector could make healthcare more affordable/On the 
technological front, technologies like telemedicine, AI-driven diagnosis and data collected from wearables among others 
could also help in healthcare sector in delivering standardised healthcare to the last mile.
As announced in the Union Budget 2025, the government is also taking significant steps to build healthcare capacity in 
the country and establishing medical education institutions, providing broadband connectivity in rural health centres, 
enhancing digital infrastructure in primary healthcare centres and providing affordable medicines for critical cases. PLI 
scheme for pharmaceuticals is expected to boost domestic manufacturing keeping costs affordable. In an effort to make 
medicine affordable, a number of life-saving drugs and medicines have been exempted from basic customs duty. 
Startups in healthcare, especially HealthTech, are also coming up with innovative solutions at affordable cost. However, 
to achieve this, regulations need to be implemented, both at central and at the state level for assuring quality 
with affordability.1
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
6
Source: PwC analysis
1.1. Introduction to value-based healthcare (VBHC) delivery
VBHC is a model which incentivises healthcare providers2 based on the outcomes of the services they deliver to the 
patients. This approach emphasises improving patient health outcomes by linking the provider’s payments directly to the 
quality and efficiency of the care provided. It is an alternative to the traditional FFS model, where providers are paid 
based on the quantity of services provided rather than the quality.
01
Introduction
Patient-centered medical home
Patient focused model where an entire team of 
healthcare professionals is formed to deliver 
personalised care plans.
Shared savings
In this model providers and payers agree on an 
expected medical cost and any savings achieved 
below this threshold will be shared between the payer 
and provider.
Bundled payment
A payment model where a predefined amount of 
fee is collected upfront from the patient based on 
the services related to their diagnosis..
Capitation model
Similar to the bundled payment model a set amount of 
fee will be received from the patient but over a certain 
period like per month or per year.
Pay for performance
The providers are incentivised based on their 
performance offering them a bonus when they perform 
exceeding threshold set based on specific metrics and 
benchmarks and charged with penalties when they 
don't meet the threshold.
Shared risks
This model is similar to the shared savings model, in 
addition to sharing the savings, the financial burden 
of excess healthcare costs exceeding the threshold 
will also be distributed between both parties.
Figure 1: Different VBHC models 
2 Note: For this report, healthcare providers comprises – entities or individuals which deliver medical services, care and treatment to patients 
including hospitals, clinics, doctors and other medical professionals.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
7
Figure 2: Key principles of value-based healthcare
Patient experience
Value-based care will place 
greater emphasis on patient 
experience, as healthcare 
providers will be incentivised 
based on the quality of care 
they deliver to the patients.
Patient-centered care
The focus is on prioritising 
patient’s needs and 
preferences, creating 
customised treatment plans 
for patients. The primary 
goal is to place the patient at 
the heart of the healthcare 
system.
Outcome-based payments
Providers will be compensated based on 
the quality of the care they deliver and 
patient recovery outcomes rather than 
merely the volume of treatments or 
number of tests conducted.
Integrated care delivery
Integrated care delivery 
supports value-based care 
by coordinating healthcare 
services across providers 
and settings, leading to 
improved patient health 
outcomes.
Cost of care
Healthcare costs are notably 
high and making them 
affordable for everyone has 
been a priority for many. 
Value-based care could make 
great progress in this area, as 
it is expected to significantly 
reduce treatment costs 
compared to the traditional 
fee for service models.
1
2
3
4
5
Cost of 
care
Integrated 
care 
delivery
Outcome-based 
payments
Patient-
centered 
care
Patient 
experience
Source: PwC analysis
PwC India conducted a survey in January 2025 among various stakeholders from the healthcare fraternity, to capture 
their understanding about VBHC. We reached out to more than 50 respondents across different categories – physicians, 
healthcare providers, consultants, professionals – to capture their point of view. 
Figure 3: Which of the following do you consider as key principles of VBHC?
Source: PwC analysis
1.38%
12.41%
17.93%
20.00%
23.45%
24.83%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
30.00%
Not Sure/Unfamiliar with the concept
Cost of Care
Integrated care delivery
Enhancing Patient Experience
Patient-centered care
Outcome-based payments
According to the survey, nearly 50% of the respondents perceived VBHC as a patient-centric, outcome based model. 
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
8
1.2. State of healthcare delivery in India
India’s healthcare delivery system is highly fragmented with a mix of public and private sectors for both providers and 
payers leading to several challenges related to inadequate infrastructure, rural-urban disparity and high out of pocket 
expenditure. From a global perspective, India’s spending on healthcare is quite low (public funds, private funds, external 
flows) when compared to its neighbouring developing countries. However, the government has initiated various 
programmes to improve the access and quality of care for the citizens. This abatement reflects the impact of increased 
government investment in healthcare, evidenced by the 85% increase in budget allocated for the Department of Health 
and Family from 2017-18 to 2021-22.3
India’s healthcare sector primarily focuses on three key areas – digital transformation, preventive care and wellness, 
and overall healthcare infrastructure development. Numerous healthcare policies and initiatives are also being 
launched by the government to support the sector.
To provide health coverage to the country’s population, the Government of India has been focusing on preventive care 
and wellness, improving healthcare infrastructure and digital initiatives. A pivotal government initiative to help the 
government achieve this goal is the AB PM-JAY, an initiative that aims to achieve universal health coverage by aiding a 
family with up to INR 5,00,000 of insurance coverage4 every year. The initiative is also directed towards the 
implementation of a value-based incentive system, focusing on patient outcomes and quality of care over the quantity of 
services provided.
Healthcare providers are also investing in modern hospitals, clinics and diagnostic centres equipped with advanced 
medical technology, embracing digital innovations such as electronic medical records, telemedicine, health apps and 
remote monitoring systems to improve patient care. These innovations have the capability to improve healthcare 
outcomes and reduce costs in the long term. India's healthcare regulatory system is also evolving to ensure patient 
safety, promote high-quality care and control costs.
While there are still significant challenges to overcome, the continued investment in healthcare and innovation in the 
sector highlight India’s keenness to transform its healthcare landscape from volume-based care to value-based 
care model.
3 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=2094604 
4 https://nha.gov.in/PM-JAY
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
9
Many countries across the globe are shifting towards the VBHC model due to changes in priorities towards patient-
centred models, to improve cost efficiency and to enhance the accountability of the healthcare providers. Governments 
worldwide are shifting from traditional FFS models to capitation, bundled payments, etc. to incentivise the providers who 
supply coordinated and quality care for their patients. This transformation is being led by technological advancement for 
data-driven decision-making and the framing of global health standards, where countries can learn from each other’s 
experience for adopting the best healthcare practices.
02
An overview of VBHC’s adoption
Legislations like ACA and programmes like QPP led the implementation of VBHC in the USA.
What were the context and 
challenges which led to the 
adoption of VBHC?
How did it work?
What are the monitoring 
mechanisms?
The USA spends around 17% of its 
GDP on healthcare5 and ~25% of it 
is considered redundant,6 which can 
be attributed to factors like 
unnecessary medical procedures, 
inefficient services, missed 
prevention opportunities, etc. The 
US has been witnessing an 
increase in overall healthcare costs, 
which does not necessarily 
correlate with enhanced patient 
outcomes.
To continue reaping the benefits of 
the VBHC model, CMS plays a 
pivotal role in monitoring value-
based programmes. It tracks 
performance metrics, patient 
outcomes and cost savings through 
various programmes such as the 
hospital readmission reduction 
programme and hospital value-
based purchasing. There has also 
been widespread adoption of EHRs, 
which enables the authorities to 
monitor the performance of the 
providers and patient outcomes in 
real time. 
To combat these issues, the US 
government came up with the ACA, 
which shifted the focus from 
volume-based reimbursements to a 
model where providers will be paid 
based on the quality of outcomes. 
The ACA facilitated the formation of 
ACOs, where a group of healthcare 
providers collaborate to manage the 
health outcomes of the population. 
This cooperation motivates 
providers to enhance patient 
outcomes while simultaneously 
striving to reduce overall costs The 
ACA also laid the groundwork for 
the QPP, which was later 
established by MACRA. The QPP 
incentivises healthcare providers to 
prioritise both quality and cost-
effectiveness. 
5 https://www.pgpf.org/article/almost-25-percent-of-healthcare-spending-is-considered-wasteful-heres-why/
6 https://www.cms.gov/data-research/statistics-trends-and-reports/national-health-expenditure-data/historical
1
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
10
What were the context and 
challenges which led to the 
adoption of VBHC?
How did it work?
What are the monitoring 
mechanisms?
The country has also been 
leveraging research conducted by 
independent organisations to 
evaluate value-based programmes, 
along with patient satisfaction 
surveys.
By meeting established quality 
benchmarks, providers can earn 
bonus payments, while those who 
fail to meet performance standards 
may face penalties. This approach 
aims to reduce unnecessary 
healthcare spending. ACA has also 
laid the groundwork for introducing 
quality metrics and performance 
incentives by initiating programmes 
such as the Hospital Readmission 
Reduction Programme and Hospital 
Value-Based Purchasing, which 
penalised hospitals for high 
readmission rates and rewarded 
them for performing better on the 
quality standards.7 
To enhance value-based care in the 
USA, different payment models 
have also been developed to 
gradually shift from FFS to 
alternative payment models. The 
introduction of bundled payment is 
one such initiative under which a 
single payment is made based on a 
specific episode of care. Another 
prominent model is the capitation 
model where providers are paid a 
predetermined amount per patient 
for a specific period regardless of 
the services availed. The 
government has also introduced a 
model called the PCMH, with a 
focus on providing comprehensive 
primary care. 8 It leverages a team-
based approach to provide 
coordinated care and has been 
associated with chronic disease 
management, increased preventive 
care and cost savings. The PCMH 
model follows the FFS plus the 
PMPM models. Providers receive a 
base PMPM payment for routine 
care, encouraging preventive health 
management and incentivising 
providers to keep patients healthy. 
7 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6139911/
8 https://www.cms.gov/medicare/payment/prospective-payment-systems/acute-inpatient-pps/hospital-readmissions-reduction-program        
hrrp#:~:text=The%20Hospital%20Readmissions%20Reduction%20Program,in%20turn%2C%20reduce%20avoidable%20readmissions.
Legislations like ACA and programmes like QPP led the implementation of VBHC in the USA.
1
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
11
What were the context and 
challenges which led to the 
adoption of VBHC?
How did it work?
What are the monitoring 
mechanisms?
For specialised or acute services, 
additional FFS payments are made, 
ensuring compensation for complex 
care beyond routine management 
and balancing cost predictability 
with service-specific remuneration. 
Thus, providers are incentivised to 
maintain health and efficiency 
through PMPM but also have the 
flexibility to deliver necessary, 
additional services via FFS.
The NHS in the UK is facing rising 
healthcare costs due to factors such 
as technological advancements, 
expensive treatments and increased 
demand for services. The UK has 
also experienced a significant 
enhancement in its ageing 
population, with ~18% of the 
population aged ≥65 years in 
2023.[7] This demographic often 
suffers from multiple chronic 
diseases requiring ongoing 
management. In response, the UK 
adopted a multipronged approach in 
the implementation of VBHC. 
Significant steps in the VBHC by the 
UK (NHS) involve introducing 
integrated care systems, quality and 
outcomes framework, and the 
adoption of payment by results 
model.
To monitor health initiatives, the 
NHS has established the NICE, 
which assesses the cost-
effectiveness of new treatments and 
interventions and evaluates the 
costs against the outcomes.12 
The NHS also utilises a 5-step BRM 
framework to monitor the 
advantages gained from the 
healthcare transformation projects. 
In addition, the NHS incorporates 
assessment reports from 
organisations such as UKRI. These 
offer an outsider’s perspective on 
the effectiveness of the NHS 
strategies, aiding in the refinement 
of approaches to achieve the 
desired health outcomes.
Several initiatives have shaped the 
transition to VBHC in the UK:
•
Integrated care systems:9
The system forges partnerships 
between the NHS, local councils 
and voluntary sectors to develop 
shared healthcare plans and 
joint services. The focus 
includes better outcomes for the 
patients, prevention of disease, 
reduction in health inequalities 
and enhanced productivity of the 
workforce.
•
Quality and outcomes 
framework:10 It is an annual 
reward and incentive 
programme for general 
practitioners based on the 
quality of the healthcare 
provided while dealing with 
different disease burdens. The 
GPs are assessed on 76 
indicators comprising domains 
such as clinical health, public 
health and quality improvement.
•
Payment by results: 11 It is a 
system where each treatment 
and procedure is given a specific 
price based on the national tariff 
system. The cost is determined 
using the average cost of 
providing that specific service at 
the NHS.
9 https://www.longtermplan.nhs.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/08/nhs-long-term-plan-version-1.2.pdf
10 https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/data-tools-and-services/data-services/general-practice-data-hub/quality-outcomes-framework-qof
11 https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/data-tools-and-services/data-services/hospital-episode-statistics/payment-by-results
12 https:/www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK310330/
Changing demographics and rising overall costs led to the implementation of VBHC at the NHS, UK.
2
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
12
What were the context and 
challenges which led to the 
adoption of VBHC?
How did it work?
What are the monitoring 
mechanisms?
Brazil’s healthcare system is a mix 
of public and private players, relying 
mainly on the FFS model for 
payment. The increase in 
population, longer life expectancy 
and rising healthcare costs due to 
technological advancements are 
some of the reasons for a country 
like Brazil to move towards the 
VBHC model. Additionally, the 
country has also been leveraging 
international experiences, such as 
those of the US, which has already 
started implementing the VBHC 
models. This implementation has 
helped Brazil to transition smoothly 
to a VBHS.
Brazil has developed a 
standardised measurement tool to 
evaluate quality measures, 
pertaining to the process, outcomes 
and patient experience. 
 
Some of the steps taken by Brazil to 
move towards value-based 
healthcare include the formation of 
the ICHOM, which aligns Brazilian 
hospitals with global health 
standards. The consortium aims to 
implement standardised health 
outcomes measurement sets for 
heart failure, stroke and hip and 
knee osteoarthritis, across the 
hospitals in the country and improve 
overall patient care. Since the 
country has a mix of both public and 
private players, the private sector 
has formed the ANAHP, which is 
actively involved in embracing 
quality measures and adopting 
value-based payment models for its 
settings. Apart from these 
initiatives, the country regularly 
gathers insights from the pilot 
programmes to identify the best 
practices and areas of 
improvement.
Given below are a few examples of VBHC's adoption.
Context
Challenges
What worked well?
What was the value 
generated?
A leading hospital in 
South Denmark Region 
was looking for a patient-
centred improvement 
model with a focus on 
data-driven innovation, 
patient-experience 
outcomes and 
streamlining. They 
intended to improve the 
KPIs like hospitalisation 
time, patient readmission 
post-surgery, revision 
knee replacement due to 
implant failure and patient 
satisfaction post-
treatment among others.
The cohesiveness of the 
clinical and administrative 
teams led to the result-
oriented ownership of the 
initiative within a hospital. 
Especially, the 
involvement of clinical 
staff in such activities 
provides a huge impetus 
to the entire objective of 
providing value-based 
healthcare for the benefit 
of the patients.
The decision regarding 
the KPIs that should be 
strategically targeted is 
usually a subject of 
deliberation among 
caregivers and clinicians, 
along with the adequate 
and accurate capture of 
data. These are 
especially susceptible to 
falling within the zone of 
apprehensions regarding 
the treating team’s clinical 
competence as well as 
the hospital’s reputation. 
In terms of patient 
outcomes, there was a 
reduction in the patient 
hospitalisation time, 
decline in readmission 
within 30 days post-
surgery, as well as 
increase in-patient 
satisfaction index. 
Brazil is moving towards a VBHC model by leveraging international experiences.
3
Risk-sharing arrangements in Denmark for knee replacement surgery provided a solid foundation for 
supplying value-based healthcare to patients
1
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
13
Context
Challenges
What worked well?
What was the value 
generated?
Further, the support of 
MedTech vendors, e.g. a 
leading knee implant 
manufacturing 
organisation in this case, 
participated in open 
dialogue meetings with 
the clinical and 
administrative team at the 
hospital. These led to the 
development of risk-
sharing agreements as a 
healthcare outcome-
based payment 
mechanism.
Further, the method of 
processing the data and 
setting up the baseline 
parameters in a 
centralised database, 
against which the post-
VBHC initiative 
implementation benefits 
could be understood and 
tracked seems to be a 
matter needing collective 
brainstorming.
In terms of finances and 
payment mechanism, the 
prices of knee implants 
were adjusted based on 
their actual performance 
Also, free revision 
implants were done to 
treat patients whose 
cases exceeded the 
maximum target value or 
the supplier promised a 
better revision 
percentage, leading to 
cost savings for the 
hospital. 
A leading hospital in 
Geneva aimed to evaluate 
a multifaceted behavioural 
intervention that entailed 
the monitoring of the 
number of diagnostic tests 
done and medicine 
prescriptions made for the 
patients by internal 
medicine residents. The 
purpose was to create 
cost-related awareness 
among the clinical team, 
which could reduce the 
hospital costs.
While the study helped 
create objectivity and cost 
awareness among the 
clinical team members 
who are the internal 
stakeholders, it also 
helped the hospital to 
demonstrate their 
intention towards 
adoption of VBHC to the 
insurers (payers) that the 
hospital should promote 
continuous improvement 
of outcomes by promoting 
transparency and cost 
effective care. 
In a capitation model of 
payment, where the 
hospital is paid a fixed 
amount for patient end-to-
end interaction, initiatives 
like this can help 
ascertain the areas that 
entail additional costs 
associated with care 
provision and help curb 
them, resulting in savings 
to the hospital within 
the amount.
One of the challenges 
was that the data 
extracted from the EMR 
inadequately captured the 
clinical circumstances 
that led to the ordering of 
a particular service, which 
may be essential for 
some patients.
Additionally, the team was 
unable to accurately 
retrieve blood test costs 
from the global laboratory 
expenses database and 
had to employ certain 
proxy measures to arrive 
at realistic assumptions.
This study provided a 
starting point for a further 
assessment of the 
influence of the initiative 
in changing behaviour by 
analysing the changes in 
volume and cost 
efficiency of services. On 
a larger scale, this study 
enhanced the hospital’s 
awareness regarding the 
cost of care principles, as 
well as the avenues of 
savings within the 
capitation model. 
This result could 
potentially be helpful for 
other hospitals having 
capitation model 
agreements with payers, 
to investigate the entire 
healthcare delivery chain 
and recognise such 
potential revenue 
leakage areas.
Hospital cost optimisation project in Switzerland ensures transparency between patients, providers and 
payers, as well as highlights the missed benefits for providers.
2
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
14
India’s healthcare system faces critical barriers from the facets of public health expenditure, fragmented insurance 
coverage and significant OOPEs. These issues culminate in deterring access to people from low-income categories to 
quality healthcare. Since the population is continuously increasing, there’s a dire need to focus on providing affordable 
and quality healthcare.
03
The need for transitioning to a VBHC model
13 https://pib.gov.in/PressReleseDetailm.aspx?PRID=2058791
14 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC4655362/
Enhancing patient outcomes
The Indian healthcare system currently 
depends on the traditional FFS model. 
It incentivises service providers to 
focus more on the quantity than the 
quality of the services provided. Value-
based healthcare helps shift the notion 
from the quantity to the quality of the 
care provided. Here, service providers 
are incentivised to deliver healthcare 
services with a focus on beneficial 
health outcomes rather than on the 
number of billable services.
Cost-effectiveness
The public health expenditure in India has steadily increased in the recent 
years. However, it does not correlate with the health outcomes, which can 
be attributed to the conventional FFS model in use. Healthcare providers 
are paid for the number of services without accounting for the 
corresponding outcomes. VBHC optimises health expenditure by aligning 
payment milestones with patient-reported outcomes instead of the volume 
of services rendered, paving the way for optimal resource utilisation. For 
example, during in-hip replacement surgeries, by emphasising more on 
the pre-surgical health assessments like managing weight, blood pressure 
and sugar levels at optimal levels, the probability of requiring invasive 
procedures can be reduced. This continuum-of-care approach leads to 
quicker discharge, faster recoveries and minimises readmission rates and 
post-surgical complications. 
Insurance coverage
In India, poor health insurance coverage has steadily increased the financial strain on patients. In such a scenario, the 
government and private insurance schemes primarily focus on in-patient treatments, a hospital-based healthcare 
system for severe medical conditions. However, out-patient care is more vital as regular health checkups, diagnostic 
services and treatments for non-communicable diseases are often excluded from the insurance coverage. This 
disparity in provision demands patients to bear the costs of routine health care, enhancing their OOPE. Currently, 
OOPEs as a proportion of overall health expenses is 39.4%, higher than the global average.13 VBHC models 
emphasise preventive healthcare strategies. By focusing on health outcomes rather than the quantum of services, the 
VBHC model improves overall health outcomes and drastically reduces the frequency and severity of the illness. For 
example, providing coordinated care for asthma patients, which includes health education and regular monitoring, can 
result in better disease management and lower emergency admission rates. This ultimately reduces the OOPEs and 
insurance claims.14
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
15
15 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC6567948/)
16 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC9104072/pdf/jcm-11-02435.pdf
Chronic disease management
Chronic diseases are a major factor causing disability 
and premature death among the elderly population in 
India.15 Currently, India has a triple disease burden 
which includes rising NCDs, difficulty in controlling them 
and those occurring due to climate change. In 2017, 
~4.7 million deaths (49% of all-cause mortality) were 
reported due to NCDs.16 The current FFS model does 
not incentivise preventive care techniques, which are 
essential for the management of chronic diseases. 
Incorporating the VBHC model in this ensures that the 
patient’s needs and requirements, as well as the 
therapeutic goals, are covered in the treatment 
landscape. For example, applying the VBHC approach 
in diabetes management would aid in integrating an 
ecosystem of healthcare providers like 
endocrinologists, dietitians, diabetes educators and 
primary care physicians, into an overall care team. This 
team would work together in charting a comprehensive 
treatment plan tailored to individual patient’s needs 
and necessities.
Data-based decision-making
Fragmented IT integration poses significant challenges 
in the seamless transfer of patient records across 
primary, secondary, and tertiary healthcare facilities. 
Slow-paced adoption of digital technologies in rural 
areas limits the unification of electronic medical records 
for resident patients. The absence of a central data 
repository and lack of data analytics capability impedes 
the effective capturing of healthcare outcomes for the 
corresponding interventions applied. 
This paucity of integration restricts government officials 
from making policy decisions based on real-world 
evidence. VBHC helps in the development of uniform 
electronic medical records embedded with data 
analytics capabilities to enable the continuous 
monitoring of patient health outcomes, identify gaps and 
suggest improvement measures.
Achieving health equity
India strives to enhance healthcare access to people of different socio-economic strata. VBHC models play a crucial 
role in enabling healthcare access to people of the lower socio-economic strata, by phasing out incentives/payment 
models in line with health outcomes achieved for each intervention/procedure. The model also ensures that the 
population at the bottom of the economic ladder receive timely care and treatment, remarkably improving the overall 
healthcare landscape.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
16
Over the past few years, a few of the industry’s leading 
stakeholders have begun to redefine their mission and 
redesign the operating model to improve healthcare 
value, emphasising patient-related health outcomes 
related to the resources required or costs. This transition 
is apparent in India’s healthcare landscape, where the 
private and government sectors are working collectively 
towards adopting a VBHC model.
The government’s efforts to promote value-based 
healthcare are further supported by initiatives such as the 
National Health Stack and the National Digital Health 
Blueprint. These strive to build a digital health ecosystem 
which facilitates the implementation of value-based care 
by generating data on the healthcare services provided 
and patient outcomes. Public awareness initiatives and 
educational training programmes are also being launched 
to enhance awareness regarding precautionary care and 
encourage patient engagement in their healthcare.
The AB PM-JAY is the one of the important 
developments of this transformation, as it aims to 
transition the country’s healthcare sector from a volume-
based to a value-based care system. This scheme is a 
part of a broader strategy to ensure improved health 
outcomes and quality-driven healthcare for the Indian 
population, particularly the economically vulnerable.
The framework of VBHC in PM-JAY is formulated to 
upgrade the quality of healthcare services by focusing on 
patient outcomes rather than the volume of services 
provided. As mentioned in the VBHC Policy Document, 
the NHA is entrusted with defining and boosting 
healthcare value, ensuring that the healthcare system 
contributes to national wellbeing by focusing on health 
gains rather than short-term outcomes. 17 This approach 
involves organising care around medical conditions, 
systematically measuring outcomes and costs, and 
incorporating healthcare delivery systems to provide 
comprehensive, patient-centric care.
04
Building a foundation for VBHC's adoption 
in India
17 https://abdm.gov.in:8081/uploads/VBHC_Policy_Document_For_Upload_a20f871a55.pdf
The need for enhancing VBHC within PM-JAY is driven 
by the challenges faced by the Indian healthcare system, 
including the triple burden of disease, high OOPEs and 
the necessity for financial protection against catastrophic 
health expenses. By concentrating on value, the PM-JAY 
aims to improve healthcare outcomes, reduce the 
associated expenditure and provide financial support to 
the population.
The timeline for the implementation of value-based care 
initiatives under PM-JAY includes several key milestones 
in the last decade.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
17
18 Ibid
Figure 4: Timeline of VBHC in India
Introduction of the 
Comprehensive 
Primary Health 
Care (CPHC)
DRG Based 
Payments
Establishment 
of Quality Cells 
and checklists
Continuum of 
care approach
2017
2018
2021
2022
National Health 
Tech Stack
National Digital 
Health Blueprint
2022
2022
Value based 
incentives
HeFTA Unit
Day care/follow 
– up packages
Location 
linked HBP 
pricing
Source: https://abdm.gov.in:8081/uploads/VBHC_Policy_Document_For_Upload_a20f871a55.pdf
The introduction of the CPHC in 2018, covering both maternal and child health services as well as non-transmissible 
diseases, including free essential drugs and diagnostic services, the ABDM in 2021, the establishment of quality cells 
and checklists in 2021, day-care follow-up packages, location-linked HBPs and the proposed implementation of DRG-
based payments, a continuum-of-care approach in 2022 are a part of this timeline. These programmes aspire to create a 
comprehensive digital infrastructure, enhance quality assurance and refine provider payment systems to support value-
based care.18 Monitoring the performance of healthcare providers is a critical component of the VBHC model. The use of 
VBIs to measure this focuses on patient outcomes and satisfaction. This approach aims to incentivise providers to deliver 
high-quality care and improve outcomes.
The incorporation of VBIs into PM-JAY involves incorporating these measures into the hospital empanelment module and 
transaction management system. This integration will enable the calculation of financial incentives based on provider 
performance, encouraging healthcare providers to focus on delivering value to the patients. A public dashboard will also 
be developed to display provider performance, promoting transparency and accountability.
In addition to government initiatives, the private sector is also contributing to the adoption of value-based care in India. 
PPPs have been established to provide mobile health clinics, telehealth services and health insurance schemes, 
enhancing access to care for deprived populations and improving health outcomes. Successful case studies, like a 
private multispecialty hospital’s value-based model and a regional healthcare centre’s Chronic Care Programme, 
demonstrate the potential of value-based care in enhancing patient outcomes and reducing healthcare costs.
In conclusion, India’s journey towards embracing a VBHC model is supported by a comprehensive framework under the 
PM-JAY, emphasising the need for enhanced care quality, patient outcomes and financial protection. The integration of 
VBIs, benchmarking and public–private partnerships are crucial for this transition, guaranteeing an improved, efficient 
and patient-centred healthcare system.
20.00%
23.33%
27.50%
29.17%
Inefficient allocation of
resources
High levels of patient
dissatisfaction
Escalating healthcare costs
Poor healthcare outcomes
Figure 5: What are all challenges which a VBHC model can effectively address in the 
Indian context?
Source: PwC analysis
As per the survey, 53% of the respondents believed that the VBHC model could address problems like poor healthcare 
outcomes and high levels of patient dissatisfaction which necessitates the need for an alternate model which focuses 
more on patient centricity and care delivery outcomes. 
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
18
Setting quality metrics and assessment criteria in a VBHC is vital for achieving better health outcomes and ensuring 
patient satisfaction and cost efficiency. The criteria can also help providers take responsibility for their actions and make 
informed decisions since the framework:
•
provides a basis for assessing the performance of various healthcare providers and systems to make it possible to 
learn from the most successful ones
•
ensures that health care professionals make appropriate and informed decisions that empower patients and improve 
the treatment results
•
sets standards of patient care that providers must comply with to be considered excellent within the health system
•
quality metrics provide essential data to patients and healthcare payers which aids in choosing alternatives.
Quality measures can be categorised into the following categories:
05
Defining quality measures and standards 
Focus on the 
outcomes that 
patients should 
expect from their 
treatment, such as 
improved health, 
reduced symptoms 
and decreased 
re-admissions.
These measures play a critical role in ensuring that healthcare delivery enhances outcomes while maintaining cost-
effectiveness. Moreover, there are several incentive structures and outcome-based payment models linked to the 
implementation of quality measures. Financial incentives are provided to healthcare providers who meet or exceed 
specific quality benchmarks, thereby rewarding high-quality care. The alignment of incentives with quality measures 
further motivates healthcare organisations to prioritise and enhance the value of the care provided to patients.
Clinical 
measures
Cost 
measures
Process
 measures
Patient-
experience 
measures
Care 
efficiency 
measures
Estimate healthcare 
costs and explore 
ways to make it 
more affordable, 
including insurance 
options.
Cover aspects such 
as safety, 
cleanliness and 
infection control.
Consider the 
patient’s 
perspective, these 
involve data directly 
reported by patients 
about their health 
status, multichannel 
experiences and 
satisfaction with 
care (e.g. patient 
satisfaction 
surveys).
Monitor the 
utilisation of 
resources, 
minimise 
unnecessary tests 
and optimise 
care pathways.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
19
Figure 6: Please rank the following quality measures in order of priority for a VBHC model in 
India, with 1 being the most important and 5 being the least important?
Source: PwC analysis
Patient Health Outcomes
Adherence to Clinical Guidelines
Patient Safety Indicators
Coverage of Patients with Insurance …
Healthcare Spending (Cost per outcome)
1
2
3
4
5
Patient health outcomes
Adherence to clinical guidelines
Patient safety indicators
Coverage of patients with 
insurance (Public/Private)
Healthcare spending (cost per outcome)
The survey highlights the need for quality measures where the primary quality measure should be linked to patient 
health outcomes, adherence to clinical guidelines while also including measures related to patient safety indicators and 
insurance coverage. 
Clinical measures
Clinical measures in value-based healthcare focus on assessing the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of patient care 
to ensure better outcomes and reduce overall healthcare costs. Different ways to track clinical outcomes comprise:
1. Patient-centred care: Providing treatment plans which suits the individual patient’s needs and considers their 
preferences and values. Some examples include incorporating shared decision-making for devising treatment plans 
and providing plans that embrace the patient’s life circumstances, such as work-related limitations.
2. Readmission rates: Focus on the reduction in readmission rates by providing coordinated care and ensuring a 
properly planned hospital discharge. The following activities can attain this outcome, which include imparting proper 
education to patients during the discharge and implementing follow-up protocols for discharge such as planning a 
home visit or phone calls.
3. Care transition: Ensure a smooth transition between the various care settings, to support the speedy recovery of 
patients. Some of the ways to ensure this include providing clear instructions to the patients about medications, 
precautions and follow-up appointments during the discharge.
4. Symptom management: Ensuring that the providers manage the physical and psychological symptoms of the 
patients to improve the quality of care. Screening the patient for mental health conditions and implementing pain 
management protocols are some of the methods through which the providers can manage such symptoms.
5. Chronic disease management: Focus on consistent monitoring and treatment for the effective management of 
chronic diseases and the prevention of complications. Some examples include regular monitoring of blood pressure 
for patients suffering from hypertension, implementation of disease management programmes, etc.
Several organisations around the world have laid down different standards to ensure that the above clinical standards 
are consistently being followed. WHO has framed guidelines related to health promotion, infection control and patient 
safety for improving the overall quality of patient care. IHI, a global non-profit organisation has put forth frameworks 
focusing on cost reduction, community health and enhancing the patient care experience. NQF, another non-profit 
organisation has laid down quality benchmarks to achieve better clinical outcomes.
By integrating these KPIs, healthcare providers can identify the gaps in care, ensuring timely interventions which prevent 
complications and improve long-term health outcomes. Preventive care KPIs can help in early detection and disease 
prevention allowing healthcare providers to allocate resources more effectively. Clinical process measures can help 
enhance healthcare coordination ensuring seamless transitions between primary, secondary and post-acute care, which 
can reduce fragmentation in the healthcare delivery. Additionally, tracking these KPIs facilitates performance-based 
reimbursement models and aligning provider incentives with patient outcomes rather than service volume.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
20
Cost measures
In the evolving healthcare landscape, a persistent challenge has been increasing healthcare costs which exerts 
tremendous financial burden on patients. Cost measures in the VBHC landscape address methods to curtail exorbitant 
treatment costs and improve healthcare accessibility to people of all economic classes.
The government plays a major role in regulating these expenses. In India, under initiatives like Ayushman Bharat, the 
NHA introduced the Health Financing and Technology Assessment (HeFTA) to ensure value for money in the PM-JAY 
initiatives. The HeFTA unit will inform decision points on the inclusion or exclusion of certain procedures and treatments 
within the health packages by utilising the evidence of cost-efficient health technologies. HeFTA also provides inputs for 
baselining the prices of new technologies proposed for the health benefit package (HBP), resulting in the regulation of 
these prices and ensuring that healthcare providers are not burdened with excess expenditure.
The PM-JAY initiative also prioritises transformation from a traditional health care payment model to a new diagnosis-
related group model, where the physicians are incentivised and reimbursed based on the case severity. This approach 
disincentivises the recommendation of superficial treatment in severe cases by healthcare providers. The AB PM-JAY 
scheme will also incentivise the hospitals associated, based on the extent of the OOPE of patients, reducing the 
healthcare cost burden on the patients.19
The different cost measures being implemented in VBHC settings are:
19 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5116537/
Healthcare bundles: The release of healthcare 
bundles involves charging patients for a 
comprehensive treatment plan rather than for each 
service. This method usually helps curtail potential 
additional expenses due to unplanned 
complications, ensuring that the patients are not 
overcharged.
A few KPIs that help track the cost measures of a VBHC model are:
•
Cost of care: Total expenses incurred by a patient for receiving medical services.
•
OOPEs: The proportion of healthcare expenditure which is not covered by insurance and has to be paid by 
the patients.
•
Insurance claim rates: Prevalence and number of claims filed by policyholders to recover medical costs 
from insurers.
By setting the target values for these KPIs as well as monitoring the healthcare providers and insurers can corroborate 
that the financial incentives in the healthcare systems are aligned to reducing the patients’ expenditure and emphasise 
more on the value delivered.
Process measures
Process quality standards in the value-based care setup ensure that efficient, equitable and effective healthcare is 
delivered while ensuring overall outcomes. The key aspects related to process quality include ensuring overall patient 
safety; maintaining a clean and hygienic environment for promoting patient wellbeing; implementing protocols to control 
the infection; respecting the individual needs of a patient; and maintaining staff competency to name a few.
Some of the OKRs related to patient safety that can be leveraged under value-based care include a reduction in 
nosocomial infections and adverse drug events, continuous monitoring of preventable mortality, and collecting 
patient feedback related to safety. Hospitals can be incentivised to maintain these outcomes for reimbursements. 
Certain standards that can be referred to define the quality measures within the organisation include the 
NPSGs by the JCI. The standards cover aspects like improving medication safety, prevention of harm from falls and 
ensuring safe surgery, to name a few. Various strategies for monitoring patient safety include the establishment of an 
Incident Reporting System, where staff can report adverse events and near misses to ensure greater transparency. 
Tools like EHRs can also be leveraged for real-time monitoring of patient safety and flagging potential issues.
Transparent pricing: Providing transparent cost 
estimates for procedures and care episodes, through 
utilising available tools and resources.
Value-based payment: Value-based payment 
helps ensure that the payment is directly linked to 
quality and effectiveness rather than the volume of 
care. It aims to ensure that the money spent by 
the patients directly reflects the actual value of the 
care received.
Insurance coverage: Insurance plans in value-
based care focus on improving patient outcomes by 
advocating cost-effective care plans and preventive 
treatments, ultimately aiming to control the overall 
healthcare costs.
1
2
3
4
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
21
Hospitals and clinical staff should also ensure that cleanliness is maintained to boost the overall patient care quality. 
Regular hospital assessments include ensuring that all the surfaces are cleaned and rooms are disinfected. For the 
clinical staff, hand hygiene compliance rates must be monitored to prevent infections. Providers can be penalised if the 
standards are not being adhered to. WHO, CDC and the MoHFW have laid down healthcare cleaning and disinfection 
guidelines which can be accessed by hospitals to maintain cleanliness per requirements. Some of the ways to monitor 
cleanliness include routine environmental audits that include scheduled and random ones. Additionally, technology such 
as UV lights can also be leveraged to check the sanitation levels of various surfaces.
Hospitals should also set up quality-related standards to control nosocomial infections by maintaining proper vaccination 
rates among the clinical and administrative staff for preventing flu and other preventable infections. Quality metrics such 
as monitoring of hospital-acquired infections by the continuous observation of surgical site infections, pneumonia, urinary 
tract infections, etc should also be in place. Providers will be incentivised to maintain these standards; the more 
accurately the standards are upheld, the more they are compensated. Healthcare providers can leverage the IPC 
guidelines, set by bodies such as WHO, CDC and the National Centre for Disease Control, India to prevent the spread of 
such infections. Additionally, isolation protocols must be applied to patients suffering from infectious diseases. Various 
monitoring approaches include the establishment of a surveillance system, which can be integrated with the EHR of the 
patients providing real-time alerts to the hospital administrator. There should also be Infection Control Committees within 
the hospital, which regularly conduct periodic infection audits, review the infection data and update the protocols to meet 
the evolving needs.
The above quality metrics related to safety, cleanliness and infection control can be directly tied to reimbursement and 
financial incentives for achieving the VBHC. An outcomes-based payment model can be developed where providers are 
reimbursed if they achieve the desired cleanliness standards or improve the patient safety scores. Patient satisfaction 
surveys can also be employed which can link cleanliness and safety perceptions to reimbursements. Defining these 
quality metrics is critical for improving the overall patient outcomes and financial implications, making them essential for 
the success of VBHC in India.
Patient-experience measure
Patient-experience measures are indicators which evaluate the performance of healthcare systems from the patient’s 
perspective. These measures have become increasingly crucial as healthcare shifts towards value-based care, which 
prioritises patient outcomes and satisfaction rather than just the volume of services provided.
These measures evaluate areas such as ease of communication between healthcare providers with patients, effective 
care coordination, ease of access to services by patients and the condition of the healthcare environment. For example, 
good communication helps patients better understand their diagnoses and choose treatment options. Efficient 
coordination among healthcare providers ensures that the care provided is seamless. Access to healthcare, including 
the easy scheduling of appointments and receiving timely services, along with a clean and comfortable environment, 
significantly impacts the patient’s perception of their care. Additionally, involving patients in their healthcare decisions 
and ensuring their overall satisfaction is vital, as those who actively participate in their care tend to report higher levels 
of satisfaction.
A few KPIs which can help track this measure are:
By measuring both clinical and patient-experience metrics, healthcare providers understand the quality of care delivered, 
identifying areas where improvements can be made beyond just clinical outcomes. Integrating these KPIs into provider 
performance evaluations incentivises clinicians to prioritise patient satisfaction. Financial incentives in models such as 
pay-for-performance and shared savings programmes directly link provider reimbursement to the patient-experience 
outcomes so that providers prioritise and improve patient interactions and satisfaction. High performance on these 
measures not only ensures financial rewards but also reputation and market share as positives that lead to enhanced 
patient loyalty and better quality ratings.
Increase in-patient satisfaction levels- Surveys and 
feedback tools assess patient experiences and 
satisfaction, focusing on the healthcare providers’ care 
quality and communication skills.
NPS: Measures the likelihood of a patient recommending 
the provider to others.
PROMs: A standardised questionnaire is used, where 
patients answer questions about their symptoms, 
functional abilities and quality of life, providing a 
numerical score that reflects their subjective experience 
of their health condition.
Patient wait time: Average time a patient spends 
waiting to see a provider.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
22
Figure 7: What benefits do you anticipate from the implementation of VBHC in India? 
(in percentage) 
Source: PwC analysis
The survey highlights the potential benefits of a VBHC model which 
primarily focuses on Improved patient health outcomes, reduction in overall 
healthcare costs and increased patient satisfaction.
Care efficiency measures
The cornerstone of VBHC is a measurement of ‘value’, be it qualitative or 
quantitative. Such a measurement in terms of care efficiency should include 
objective metrics that are the most reasonable indicators of care efficiency 
among healthcare providers, ultimately reflecting in the patient outcomes. 
While it is clear that there could be a multiplicity of performance indicators 
for different aspects of care efficiency, the healthcare provider could 
customise the most relevant quality indicator based on the service provided.
Some examples of the care efficiency performance indicators are:
31%
25%
27%
16%
1%
Improved patient health outcomes
Reduction in overall healthcare costs
Increased patient satisfaction
Enhanced resource management and efficiency
Other
Definition and purpose
Example
Digital integration possibilities
LOS refers to an umbrella of 
indicators measuring the time taken 
from admission to discharge, which 
is typically calculated as an average 
of all data collected over a month 
but can also be specific to the types 
of care provided e.g. ICU and non-
ICU. While LOS has both clinical 
care efficiency and cost 
implications, as VBHC capitation 
models can be linked to the total 
cost of care incurred by the hospital.
LOS can be easily extracted from 
the HIS using easily downloadable 
and customisable reports having 
admission, shifting and discharge 
dates.
For example, in the cardiac 
intervention PTCA, based on 
various studies, the usual LOS is 
one day in ICU, followed by two 
days in the non-critical ward, with 
discharge on the fourth day.
Any deviation from these targets is 
to be documented, analysed and 
discussed in relevant quality-related 
forums across the hospital. 
Deviations from these set targets 
could be exacerbated by 
comorbidities or complexities. 
However, these should be 
documented before being classified 
as outliers.
LOS
1
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
23
Definition and purpose
Example
Digital integration possibilities
These refer to a plethora of 
indicators that measure the cases of 
infections occurring in the patient 
attributed to the care provided e.g. 
hospital-acquired infections, SSIs, 
CAUTIs, thrombophlebitis 
(particularly those caused by 
infections), etc. These not only have 
clinical care efficiency but also cost 
implications that affect the VBHC 
capitation model income 
efficiencies.
CAUTIs can be tracked by 
adequate utilisation of relevant ICD 
codes fed into the HIS.
For example, the infection rates 
imply the potential of prolonged 
stay, diagnostic tests and 
medication load as cost factors, but 
also a return to the hospital for 
treatment of illnesses arising from 
the previous stay. A CAUTI would 
merit additional tests for the 
isolation of the causal organism, 
additional medications for 
symptomatic and targeted 
treatment, as well as 
prolonged stay.
This is a self-explanatory but 
specialised indicator which 
represents the efficiency of clinical 
practice concerning the caregivers 
themselves. The intent is to 
document, analyse, discuss and 
revamp the number of avoidable 
pathology and radiology tests 
prescribed, as well as those that 
have a direct cost implication.
Targeted prescriptions audits can 
be performed through HIS 
requests/EMR entries for particular 
ICD codes.
For example, a case study relevant 
to this aspect is presented in 
Section 2 of this report where, 
using specialised skill sets and 
technology support, the 
prescriptions handed out by junior 
healthcare providers were assessed 
to establish the merit of these 
diagnostic and therapeutic 
interventions. The results revealed 
common loopholes and 
unnecessary prescriptions, which 
have a cost implication, ultimately 
compromising revenues.
These indicators measure the 
spectrum of care provision 
inefficiencies linked to re-do 
surgeries and procedures, 
re-intubations or even readmissions 
due to variations in care delivery 
outcomes. These also have clinical 
and cost implications.
Repetition of services can be 
tracked utilising targeted reports in 
HIS/EMR using the patient IDs and 
dates of admission/surgery.
For example, as seen in the case 
study in chapter 2 of the report, An 
overview of VBHC’s adoptionin the 
case of implant-based surgeries, 
where deviations in planned 
outcomes occur primarily due to 
either structural or functional faults 
in the implant, these cases need to 
be captured and compared with 
baseline indicators of success 
which are historically assessed by 
the implant vendor. Due to 
confidence in implant performance, 
vendors have commonly entered 
into risk-sharing mechanisms with 
healthcare providers to ensure that 
the payer is not burdened with the 
expenditure of the re-done surgery.
Infection rates
2
Percentage of cases with additional irrelevant diagnostic tests
3
Repetition of service
4
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
24
Definition and purpose
Example
Digital integration possibilities
This self-explanatory indicator 
ascertains the rate of patients who 
died after the planned treatment 
was provided.
While this is an aspirational 
indicator when it comes to VBHC, 
the path to progress should ideally 
consider mortality as an 
encouragement for providers to 
focus and plan strategies for 
controlling mortality and thus 
improve patient care.
There can be incentives planned by 
payers for the providers who have 
reduced the mortality rates as a part 
of care provision.
Mortality can be tracked by 
employing targeted reports 
consisting of ICD codes and 
death dates.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
24
Mortality rate
5
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
25
06
How technology can act as an enabler 
for VBHC
Technology plays a crucial role in the 
implementation of VBHC. Technology integration 
with healthcare systems has now become vital for 
the implementation of VBHC, where patient 
outcomes, satisfaction and cost efficiency take 
centre stage. Innovative tools like EMR and HIE 
have enabled care coordination by enabling 
seamless data sharing across different healthcare 
providers. AI/ML models and advanced analytics 
help predict patient risks and support prompt 
interventions, addressing complex health 
challenges. Telehealth platforms, wearables and IoT 
devices help providers monitor patients remotely, 
while cloud storage helps secure data sharing and 
storage in real time. These advancements not only 
streamline operations but also enable efficient, cost-
effective and patient-centric care, which are the core 
principles of VBHC.
VBHC can be divided into multiple stages and each 
stage requires a separate technology as an enabler. 
The diagram below illustrates the various stages, 
highlighting key processes that are critical for the 
implementation of VBHC. Additionally, it outlines 
various technology interventions used at each stage 
such as EHR, telehealth platforms, AI-driven 
analytics and compliance tools.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
26
Figure 8: Tech-enablement across VBHC’s value chain
Technological interventions
Digital front door:
•
Patient portals
•
Telehealth platforms
•
Mobile health apps
•
Online appointment 
scheduling
•
Remote patient 
monitoring devices
•
Chatbots 
•
EMR workflow 
management
•
HIS for operational 
workflow management
•
HIE (Health 
Information Exchange)
•
Common 
interoperability 
standards
•
AI enabled 
summarised clinical 
notes 
•
360-degree 
assessment tools
•
Patient engagement 
platforms
•
Provider 
performance 
dashboards
•
Hospital performance 
analytics
•
EHRs
•
Patient generated 
health data 
(wearables, apps)
•
IoT-enabled 
medical devices
•
Pharmacy data
•
Claims and billing 
data
•
HIS
Workflow and technology
Data management
Provider and patient 
engagement
Performance 
management
Enhancing 
communication and 
interaction between 
healthcare providers and 
patients to ensure 
effective treatment plans 
and patient adherence
Monitoring and 
evaluation of healthcare 
delivery performance to 
improve patient 
outcomes and align with 
value-based care 
objectives
Optimisation of healthcare 
processes and workflow 
by leveraging technology 
to enhance efficiency and 
coordination among 
healthcare providers
Collections, storage 
and management of 
patient and healthcare 
data to ensure 
accuracy and 
accessibility for 
informed decision-
making
Technology
Description
1
EHRs
EHR systems act as a digital repository containing important health-related 
patient data like medical history, medications, vitals, lab results, 
immunisations, etc. 
2
HIE
HIE systems allow the secure exchange of sensitive patient information across 
healthcare providers and institutions, ensuring coordinated and patient-centric 
treatment.
3
Wearables and IoT devices
Wearables and IoT details can help patients track many vitals like health rate, 
physical activity, sleep patterns and even glucose levels. These real-time health 
data and patterns help patients take preventive measures and proper care of 
their health.
4
Patient portals 
These portals allow patients to check their health records, access medication 
prescriptions, enable them to coordinate with healthcare providers, book 
appointments and actively engage in their healthcare journey by understanding 
their test results, diagnostic reports and treatment plans.
5
Clinical decision support 
systems
CDSS systems have a vast knowledge base, which is used by the providers to 
deliver patient-specific recommendations, thereby aiding in clinical 
decision-making.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
27
•
RCM 
•
Financial 
analytics software
•
Cost 
management 
tools
•
Business 
intelligence tools
•
Predictive 
analytics
•
Data visualisation 
platforms
•
Reporting 
software
•
Compliance and 
reporting tools
•
Security and 
privacy 
management 
systems
Audit and 
compliance
Analytics and 
reporting 
Actuarial and finance
Ensuring adherence 
to healthcare 
regulations, 
standards and 
policies to maintain 
quality and avoid 
penalties
Analysing healthcare 
data to assess costs, 
quality/care 
disparities, provider 
accountability and 
service utilisation for 
value-based care 
optimisation
Managing financial 
aspects of VBHC, 
including payment 
models, cost 
management, risk 
assessment and 
financial sustainability
Source: PwC analysis
Technology
Description
6
Telemedicine
Telemedicine platforms enable patients to access healthcare remotely via video 
and voice calls. Telemedicine plays a vital role in providing healthcare access 
to all, especially to people who live in remote areas where there is a lack of 
healthcare infrastructure.
7
Advanced data analytics
These tools help analyse massive amounts of healthcare data to identify 
patterns, predict outcomes and inform clinical and operational decisions.
8
Dashboards
Dashboards provide a simplified view of all the KPIs and metrics in the form of 
bar charts and graphs. With their help, providers can track different patterns 
and trends to monitor performances, ascertain outcomes and make informed 
decisions.
9
RCM systems
RCM systems improve the financial performance of healthcare organisations by 
streamlining billing, claim processing and payment workflows/processes. RCM 
manages financial interaction among key stakeholders, including healthcare 
providers, patients, payers and regulatory bodies.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
28
13.59%
14.13%
14.67%
17.39%
20.11%
20.11%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
Creation of platforms like sandboxes that allow for testing
and developing of digital health solutions in a controlled
environment
Patient records pertaining to remote healthcare services,
should be consolidated with EHR to enhance access to
continuum of care
Development of digital platforms that empower patients with
information and tools to manage their health effectively
Utilisation of data analytics to derive insights for improving
patient outcomes and operational efficiencies
Development of HIE and data integration platforms to enable
interoperability and seamless data exchange
Implementation of standardised EHRs for seamless data
sharing and care coordination
Source: PwC analysis
According to the survey, the implementation of VBHC will be a standardised EHR (HIE and data integration platforms) 
which will enable interoperability and seamless data exchange.
Figure 9: What are the necessary technological interventions required to advance 
value-based healthcare in India?
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
28
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
29
Figure 10: Suggested data architecture
Healthcare 
providers 
(hospitals, 
clinics, 
physicians)
Patients
Technology 
vendors
Research 
institutions
Payers 
(insurance 
companies, 
government 
programs)
Regulatory 
bodies
Data sources
Data 
acquisition
Data storage and transformation
Data access
Reporting 
and analytics
Digital foundation 
Outcomes and metrics: Patient satisfaction and engagement scores, health outcomes and quality of care metrics, 
cost effectiveness and efficiency metrics, access to care and equity metrics
Data quality, data governance and security
EHRs
Patient 
generated health 
data (wearables, 
apps)
IoT-enabled 
medical devices
HIS
Social 
determinants of 
health data
Clinical trial data
Claims and 
billing data
Pharmacy data
Data integration 
platforms
APIs for 
healthcare 
interoperability 
(e.g. FHIR)
Mobile and web 
applications for 
patient data 
input
Remote 
monitoring 
systems
HIEs
Access to data 
from single 
source of truth 
(enterprise data 
lake) to enable 
external and 
internal reporting 
and self-service 
analytics
(HIPPA , HL7 
guidelines to be 
followed)
Cost reporting
Utilisation 
reporting
Patient provider 
attribution data
Configurable 
dashboards 
Usage tracking 
and
operational 
reporting
Ad-hoc analytics 
Performance 
trends and 
benchmarking
Quality/care gap 
reporting
Cloud-based data 
lakes/warehouses
Data 
cleaning and 
standardisati
on tools
Data 
anonymisati
on and 
deidentify-
cation 
processes
Analytics layer
Care/quality 
gap analysis
Health data 
modeling
VBHC Stakeholders
Source: PwC analysis
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
30
A framework has been developed to effectively manage and utilise healthcare data, which will help optimise healthcare 
delivery and improve patient outcomes. It is based on five main pillars to ensure that the data is effectively collected, 
integrated, stored, accessed and analysed. These pillars are:
Data sources: This pillar focuses on identifying 
foundational sources of raw patient and healthcare data 
that can be applied for the calculation of different 
metrics such as patient health outcomes, healthcare 
cost, quality of care and others important for the 
successful implementation of VBHC. Various sources 
such as EHRs, patient-generated data from wearables 
and apps, IoT-enabled devices and HIS, can be 
considered for VBHC analytics and reporting purposes.
Data acquisition: During data acquisition, different 
processes and technologies are employed to collect and 
integrate data from various sources, which are identified 
in the first stage. Technologies and standards like data 
integration platforms, APIs, ETL, FHIR, and HL7 can be 
used to gather data from the identified sources into a 
cohesive and usable format. Once the data is gathered, 
it is stored in a single platform/server for further 
processing.
Data storage and transformation: All data after 
acquisition is securely stored in one place (Enterprise 
data lake, cloud storage or on-premise databases) for 
further processing. Techniques such as data 
anonymisation and deidentification are used to protect 
patient privacy, while data cleaning and standardisation 
ensure data quality. Once the data is clean and 
standardised, it goes through the analytics layer for 
health data modelling and care/quality gap analysis.
Data access: This stage ensures secure and 
standardised access to transformed data to all the 
relevant stakeholders including physicians, hospital 
administrators, insurers and policymakers. This involves 
a single source of truth, like an enterprise data lake, 
cloud storage or on-premise server, while maintaining 
compliance, security and privacy standards such as 
HIPAA and HL7.
Reporting and analytics: The final pillar focuses on 
fetching the data from a single source of truth to 
comprehensively analyse and provide reports on 
various metrics such as cost reporting, quality/care gap 
reporting, utilisation reporting and more. By leveraging 
advanced analytics, configurable dashboards can be 
created to provide real-time insights. Additionally, 
performance benchmarking can also help stakeholders 
monitor, compare and evaluate healthcare processes, 
driving improvements in care quality and efficiency.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
31
07
Challenges in adopting VBHC in India
1. Low awareness regarding VBHC in India amongst policy makers and providers
While the concept of VBHC is gaining traction globally, with various examples of country-wide policy level as well as 
institution and programme-specific interventions as seen in the case studies presented, the same is not necessarily 
true in the Indian context.
Sectoral analysis and stakeholder interviews reveal that the government has only initiated strides towards the 
implementation of certain concepts of VBHC with the PM-JAY scheme and ABDM.20
The private sector, however, has seen far lower traction. The FFS model seems to be the primary healthcare cost 
reimbursement scheme along with volume-based payment in certain cases. There seems to be a negligible 
investment of thought into the quantification of the costs linked with various delivery aspects of the value chain, hence 
allowing easily concealed loopholes in care delivery practices to thrive for long periods.
38%
46%
12%
4%
VBHC is not being actively pursued in India at this time
Efforts to adopt VBHC are minimal, with little progress
beyond initial discussions
Initial steps towards VBHC adoption are being taken,
but widespread implementation is still limited
Significant strides have been made towards VBHC
adoption, with many successful pilot programs and
increasing provider engagement
Figure 11: Where do you think India currently stands in terms of adopting VBHC?
The survey highlights that there is limited awareness amongst the respondents regarding VBHC as a concept, therefore, 
minimum efforts are made towards its adoption.
Source: PwC analysis
20 https://esanjeevani.mohfw.gov.in/assets/guidelines/ehr_guidlines.pdf
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
32
2. Varying degrees of maturity HIS and EMR systems among Indian providers 
One of the key challenges in India’s current private healthcare system is the varying degree of maturity in hospital 
HIS and EMR. The HIS an EMR systems of seasoned private hospitals are much more capable in the collection, 
classification, storage and retrieval of complex data. One of the reasons for this could be the keenness of these 
hospitals to ensure tech-supported quality healthcare, driven by specially appointed individuals who have a diverse 
analytical skill set to analyse data and visualise its benefits. The HIS/EMR procurement teams of smaller and 
standalone hospitals often cannot assess and quantify future benefits objectively, hence stunting or even jeopardising 
the spectrum of the HIS/EMR outputs of any hospital.
Additionally, the constant challenge of the perceived initial cost of a capable IT system is still prevalent. This 
perception is fuelled by a low view of the uses of the processable outcome-related information to the organisation, a 
rather suppressed intellectual block of purchasing solely based on a low initial cost as compared to its lifetime 
benefits, also known as L1 procurement. There seems to be a lack of comprehensiveness in the cost–benefit analysis 
hence causing a chasm between the existing practice and hospitals of the future.
The NABH Digital Health standards would also be an effective tool for ensuring the maturity of the HIS/EMR of the 
healthcare providers, as they are an eye opener to the myriad benefits that a capable HIS/EMR can provide.
3. Lack of reliable local baseline quality indicator data for policy makers and providers
There are various examples across the globe where countries are making conscious efforts to conduct research into 
capturing the performance data of the processes and products used, to establish a baseline. The baseline data 
encompasses relevant aspects of the current healthcare delivery value chain and is prepared with the key intention of 
benchmarking outcomes of all process and product improvements. Countries with national insurance schemes, have 
the data available on national platforms accessible to all enrolled providers. Instances of MedTech vendors 
preserving and providing data on the performance of their products are also available, thus assisting healthcare 
providers to quantitatively assess the performance of these products against the baseline data. This quantitative and 
objective analysis can ultimately translate into informed decisions in terms of investment in quality of care, as well as 
robust risk-sharing mechanisms with vendors who partner in care provision.
However, in this regard, the Indian scenario lacks the availability of a national quality indicator baseline database. 
There might be certain research papers published by a few organisations that are invested and interested; however, 
these are only available for specific new interventions and are in smaller cohorts in certain pockets of the country. It is 
a constant debate whether these research papers can be used to represent the whole of the Indian diaspora, thus 
only partially mitigating the conundrum.
4. Resistance from providers for capturing and publishing sensitive quality outcomes data 
Due to the lack of available regional outcomes data, there is an underlying resistance among care givers as well as 
healthcare provider institutions to publish the quality-of-outcomes data accessible to other organisations. It could be 
due to an apprehension that this may affect the reputation of the institution, as well as the caregivers who work there. 
This perceived violation of privacy has been a consistent topic of debate as well as one of the major impeding factors 
towards VBHC implementation in the country. Healthcare providers generally advertise aspects of their services, 
including niche treatment modalities, infrastructural capabilities and the number of surgeries done across specialties. 
In contrast, there is far less display of success rates and outcomes data on the surgeries done.
Another relevant factor is the vast gap in the doctor–patient ratio, which further translates to on-ground perceptions of 
a lack of time available for capturing and publishing quality data. A majority of the caregivers and providers seem to 
perceive a choice between care provision and capture of quality outcomes which is not necessarily the actual option. 
There appear to be only a few caregivers who have a progressive, team practice mindset, where technology as well 
as human resources can be optimally utilised for consistent capture of outcomes. Next comes the progressive 
milestone where we believe that there should be an initiation of a framework for the assessment and publishing of 
data with reasonable confidentiality, which should in-turn translate into the VBHC concept of incentivisation of 
healthcare providers who have achieved quality outcomes.
5. Nascency of a defined framework for assessing and incentivising quality for payers and 
policy makers
The current framework for assessing and incentivising quality consists mainly of the fact that the healthcare provider 
has a NABH accreditation, including quality standards for hospitals and healthcare providers. Payers across the 
country have a certain percentage of incentivised reimbursement mechanisms for providers who have accreditation. 
The IRDAI has also mandated that hospitals offering cashless services have to meet at least the pre-accreditation 
entry-level standards laid down by the NABH.
Owing to this accreditation, the healthcare provider would have to capture a stipulated number of KPIs, which would 
encompass various areas across the hospital. However, the need of the hour is that such quality consciousness must 
progress towards capturing the quality-of-outcomes data, which would be a more objective way to measure quality. It 
seems like the foundations have been laid to progress towards capturing outcomes data.
The policy makers need to collaborate and brainstorm to define a comprehensive framework for assessing the quality 
of outcomes and link them to incentives given by payers.
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
33
08
The road ahead 
21 https://www.niti.gov.in/sites/default/files/2023-02/InvestmentOpportunities_HealthcareSector.pdf
22 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC10890901/
India’s healthcare landscape is changing its approach and adopting VBHC which prioritises health outcomes and 
delivers quality, cost-effective healthcare. Since the healthcare sector is adapting to this tectonic shift, there is a pressing 
need to address the diasporic healthcare access in rural areas and extending the concentrated healthcare infrastructure 
in metropolitan cities to tier 2/3 cities and rural areas. Leveraging digital health technologies, public–private partnerships 
and health regulatory frameworks are pivotal in ensuring a smooth transition to VBHC. Following a roadmap outlines 
strategic initiatives to enhance quality healthcare access across the country.
Healthcare providers can capitalise on the growing momentum in VBHC by accelerating the adoption of 
new payment models like bundled payments, capitation models, shared risk models, etc. instead of 
lingering on conventional FFS models. Additionally, adopting newer VBHC models pushes providers with a 
legacy system to invest in modern technologies and solutions further accelerating this transition from the 
FFS model. However, complex payment models should enable risk sharing, transparency and 
accountability between providers and payers for sustainable adoption.
Willingness to adopt new payment models
According to the NITI Aayog, 60% of the country’s health infrastructure is pocketed in metropolitan cities, 
leaving rural areas untouched and fragmented. Public–private models can be a potential alternative in 
enabling private players in tier 2 and 3 cities to access healthcare services that help serve the unmet needs 
of underserved populations.21
CSR budgets can be actively channelled to boost healthcare infrastructure investments. This can include 
procuring new medical equipment, modernising existing healthcare facilities or introducing healthcare 
solutions. The collaborative PPP approach helps in the advanced integration of healthcare technologies in 
the rural regions, which are diasporic and disparate between public and private hospitals. This integration of 
technologies enables the collection, storage and analysis of patient data seamlessly empowering providers 
to deliver a more patient-centric care environment.22
Encouraging public–private partnership models
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
34
India’s digital healthcare market is projected to have a CAGR of 23.8% in the next five years where key 
areas like telemedicine, AI and EHRs gain importance in ensuring transition to VBHC.
During the COVID-19 pandemic, telemedicine was a common mode of healthcare delivery for primary care 
irrespective of geographical distribution. It encouraged patients and doctors to coordinate throughout the 
episode of care, which facilitated effective interventions, consequently reducing emergency room visits. 
 EHRs continuously document the patient’s touch points with healthcare and administrative professionals 
throughout their treatment journey. Healthcare providers can leverage EHRs in identifying data patterns for 
characterising the health status, which helps them make informed decisions on optimising better outcomes 
at lower costs.
AI-enabled diagnostics can undoubtedly accelerate the adoption of VBHC in India. Advanced AI algorithms 
in the market have the inherent capability to assess extensive real-time datasets in forecasting disease 
outbreaks, rate of patient health deterioration, hospital readmission frequencies, etc. For this, a healthtech 
organisation collaborated with a leading healthcare provider in anticipating acute kidney injury. Such 
collaboration not only resulted in good prediction models but also excelled in recommending personalised 
treatment plans based on individual health indicators.
Accelerating digital health adoption
In India, the legal and regulatory landscape is gradually aligning with adopting VBHC through health 
outcome-focused payment models. Particularly, government bodies and healthcare organisations 
continuously strive towards benchmarking various VBHC models available across the globe and 
implementing the same. The introduction of new government policies, programmes and incentives related 
to healthcare are already signalling the healthcare providers and payers to capitalise on the opportunities to 
adopt VBHC models. As per the current scenario, the Indian government supports VBHC models through 
programmes like Ayushman Bharat and PM-Jay targeting the bottom 40% of the population in terms of 
socio-economic status.23
Legal and regulatory landscape
India can provide further impetus to the healthcare 
system by adopting health data frameworks 
aligning with best practices. For example, 
adopting frameworks like SNOMED CT and ICD 
provides guidelines for health data formatting, 
formal terminologies and coding system 
standards, which are now free for use in the 
country.24 Nevertheless, it is necessary to 
designate an unbiased formal agency to validate 
the interoperability of available healthcare 
products and solutions as well as their data 
integrity. For example, despite several IT solutions 
asserting their compliance with HL7 standards, 
they failed in interoperability post-implementation. 
Hence, the government must make major efforts 
to standardise health data, nominating dedicated 
agencies to ensure robust interoperability. This set 
of agencies, regulations and implementing role-
based access control systems provide a sense of 
confidence to the various healthcare providers 
that recorded/shared data between entities by 
remaining unaltered and uncompromised.
Policy development focusing on interoperability and data integrity
23 https://abdm.gov.in:8081/uploads/VBHC_Policy_Document_For_Upload_a20f871a55.pdf
24 https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC5116537/
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
35
According to the survey, the most critical factor for a 
successful and smooth transition to VBHC in India is 
developing robust policies and regulations (23.39%), 
followed by providing adequate funding and creating 
financial incentives for providers (21.05%), developing 
and integrating advanced technology data 
platforms(20.47%), implementing comprehensive 
training programmes (18.71%) and increasing efforts to 
inform and engage patients about their healthcare 
choices (15.20%).
Increasing public investments in 
healthcare technologies
Limited ICT infrastructure has always been a primary 
challenge to India’s public hospitals and dispensaries, 
which is even more intense in remote areas. Only 
established institutions like AIIMS and PGIMER have 
better access and connectivity. However, many 
healthcare facilities with a higher footfall still lack basic 
connectivity and resources. The situation underscores 
the need for substantial investments in the latest health-
related hardware and software technologies. Due to the 
large population of the country, adopting a free and 
open-source software strategy could help organisations 
in the implementation of quality technologies at 
hospitals, clinics and individual practitioners. Many 
nations have established communication networks 
which connect healthcare facilities to enable safe and 
trustworthy exchange of health-associated information. 
Building on current frameworks is necessary for which 
the government should fuel funding for the creation of 
such add-on networks.25
1.17%
15.20%
18.71%
20.47%
21.05%
23.39%
0.00%
5.00%
10.00%
15.00%
20.00%
25.00%
Other
Increasing efforts to inform and engage patients about their
healthcare choices and the benefits of value-based care
Implementing comprehensive training programmes for
healthcare providers to adapt to new care delivery models
Developing and integrating advanced technology and data
platforms to support data sharing, outcome measurement,
and informed decision-making
Providing adequate funding and creating financial incentives
for providers to adopt and sustain value-based care models
Developing robust policies and regulations that support the
transition to VBHC
Figure 12: What do you think are the critical success factors for a smooth transition to VBHC 
in India?
Source: PwC Survey 2025
25 https://esanjeevani.mohfw.gov.in/assets/guidelines/ehr_guidlines.pdf
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
36
09
Conclusion 
In a highly competitive market where healthcare expenditures continue to grow, payers and healthcare providers need to 
balance affordable pricing and high-quality care. Payers can leverage partnerships with providers to improve the 
coordination of care, reduce costs and enhance outcomes for both healthcare providers and patients. Developing 
databases which can share information seamlessly and securely across the healthcare sector’s network is the need of 
the hour to establish a VBHC model and provide value-based healthcare for the country. 
PwC India’s extensive experience in designing data-driven VBHC solutions that reduce medical expenditures and 
improve the quality of care could help navigate the challenges of adopting VBHC for both the providers as well as 
the payers. 
Capability analysis
VBHC operating 
model design
VBHC Transition 
Framework
Performance analysis
Technology 
enablement
Change 
management
Figure 13: How PwC can help in transition to VBHC model
Source: PwC analysis
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
37
10
Glossary
S no.
Abbreviation
Full form
1
AB PM-JAY 
Ayushman Bharat Pradhan Mantri Jan Arogya Yojana
2
ACA 
Accountable Care Act
3
ACO 
Accountable Care Organization
4
ABDM 
Ayushman Bharat Digital Mission
5
AI 
Artificial intelligence
6
CAUTI 
Catheter-associated urinary tract infections
7
CAGR 
Compound annual growth rate
8
CDSS 
Clinical decision support systems
9
CHIP 
Children's Health Insurance Programme
10
CSR 
Corporate social responsibility
11
DRG 
Diagnosis-related group
12
EHR 
Electronic health records
13
EMR 
Electronic medical records
14
FFS 
Fee-for-service
15
HeFTA 
Health financing and technology assessment
16
HBP 
Health benefit package
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
38
S no.
Abbreviation
Full form
17
HIE 
Health information exchange
18
HIS 
Hospital information system
19
HL7 
Health Level Seven International
20
ICD 
International classification of diseases
21
IHI 
Institute for Healthcare Improvement
22
IPC 
Infection prevention and control
23
IoT 
Internet of things
24
JCI 
Joint Commission International
25
KPI 
Key performance indicator
26
LOS 
Length of stay
27
MACRA 
Medicare Access and CHIP Reauthorization Act
28
ML
Machine learning 
29
MoHFW
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
30
NABH 
National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers
31
NCD 
Non-communicable diseases
32
NITI Aayog 
National Institution for Transforming India Aayog
33
NPS 
Net promoter score
34
NQF 
National Quality Forum
35
PCMH 
Patient-centred medical home
36
PLI
Production Linked Incentive
37
PMPM 
Per member per month
38
PPP 
Public-private partnership
39
PROMs 
Patient reported outcome measures
40
PTCA 
Percutaneous Transluminal Coronary Angioplasty
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
39
S no.
Abbreviation
Full form
41
QOF 
Quality outcomes framework
42
QPP 
Quality payment programme
43
RCM 
Revenue cycle management
44
SNOMED CT 
Systematised nomenclature of medicine clinical terms
45
SSI 
Surgical site infection
46
VBHC 
Value-based healthcare
47
WHO 
World Health Organization
PwC | Quality measures and standards for transitioning to value-based healthcare in India
39
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms in 151 countries 
with over 360,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax services. Find out more 
and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. 
Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2025 PwC. All rights reserved.
Contact us
Abhishek Singh Tejpal, Varun Karwa, Subhodeep Ganguly, Samuel Sunderarajan, Akshay Ramani, Rashika Nandwani, 
Pavlin Kaur Johar, Deepak Singh, Shivaharshan Saravanan, Chaturya Chinta
 
 
 
 
Authors
Rubina Malhotra
Editor
Kanagavathi Murugaiah
Design
Rajiv Sabharwal
HealthTech Leader
PwC India
rajiv.r.sabharwal@pwc.com
Sayantan Chatterjee
Executive Director Digital Strategy
PwC India
sayantan.chatterjee@pwc.com
Dr Preet Matani
Executive Director, Healthcare Industry
PwC India
preet.matani@pwc.com
Dr Rana Mehta
Healthcare Leader
PwC India 
rana.mehta@pwc.com
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate 
Identity Number or CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited 
(PwCIL), each member firm of which is a separate legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources 
believed by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is 
accurate or complete. Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are 
subject to change without notice. Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any 
course of action or decision, for which they are entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither 
accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this publication in respect of the information contained within it or 
for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2025 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved.
KA/March 2025-M&C 44272
