How India spends: 
A deep dive into consumer
spending behaviour
2   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Foreword from Perfios
Powered by the robust growth of the Indian economy, coupled with a burgeoning middle and high-income class and 
proven digital infrastructure, India has emerged as a global hotspot for investment and consumer activity. This surge in 
interest is underscored by the massive influx of capital into Indian markets, a testament to the nation’s immense potential.
As consumer aspirations soar, translating into significant growth and a vast consumer market, the timely publication of this 
report is particularly significant. This comprehensive analysis delves into consumer spending and investment behaviours, 
extracting valuable insights from a vast trove of transactional data. The granular nature of this data, spanning a multitude of 
transactions, significantly enhances the credibility and reliability of the report’s findings.
Across the spectrum of spending and investments, the report offers invaluable insights for both end consumers and 
financial institutions, as well as other service providers catering to these consumers. End consumers can use the report 
to benchmark their own spending and investment patterns, identify any outliers and make necessary adjustments. For 
financial institutions, service providers and other stakeholders, the report provides a roadmap for tailoring products, 
solutions and offerings to align with consumer preferences and behaviours, ultimately delivering enhanced customer 
experiences.
By fostering a more informed and empowered consumer market, this report benefits all stakeholders. As the consumer 
market expands, end consumers stand to gain significantly from increased choice and better-tailored offerings.
We extend our sincere gratitude to PwC for their invaluable contributions as the knowledge partner for the first edition of 
this report. We hope that this comprehensive analysis provides readers with a deep understanding of India’s consumer 
spending landscape and look forward to incorporating your feedback into future editions. 
2   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
V.R. Govindarajan
Co-Founder and Executive Chairman
Perfios
3   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Foreword from Perfios
3   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Today, India is undergoing a financial revolution in which innovation and inclusion are reshaping the aspirations, growth and 
prosperity of the country’s population. As the world’s fifth largest economy, the increasing digitalisation of financial services 
has made an undeniably profound impact across the length and breadth of our nation as we continue to grow with the 
support of technology. At Perfios, we are proud to be at the heart of this evolution and are helping in shaping the future of 
finance through the power of data.
India’s consumer market is on the brink of a transformation which is fuelled by the rising middle class, expanding 
rural markets and a digitally connected, aspirational population. As we witness rapid shifts in consumer behaviour, 
understanding how India spends becomes essential for financial institutions, policymakers and businesses which looking 
to engage effectively with this dynamic market. 
This report, ‘How India Spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour’, offers a deep dive into the spending 
patterns of 30 lakh tech-first Indian consumers, by analysing their transactional data. This study provides insights into 
the spending habits of individuals across different income levels and geographical locations. The data highlights a shift in 
Indian consumption patterns, where demand for goods and services continues to grow alongside a change in payment 
preferences with UPI becoming the preferred method for transactions.
From the growing adoption of digital payment methods to the increasing prevalence of credit products, the report uncovers 
the key drivers influencing Indian consumption today. The findings highlight both opportunities and challenges for financial 
institutions, offering actionable recommendations to cater to the evolving needs of consumers. The report aims to present 
a holistic view of the Indian spending landscape which can empower stakeholders to align their strategies and offerings 
according to the recent trends in the spending habits of the country’s population.
We would like to express our heartfelt gratitude and appreciation to PwC India for joining us as the knowledge partners for 
this report. We hope that this report, which is aligned to our core belief at Perfios that ‘data has the power to empower’, will 
be a valuable resource for decision-makers across industries, helping them make informed choices that can drive growth 
and create lasting value for Indian consumers.
Sabyasachi Goswami
Chief Executive Officer
Perfios
4   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Foreword from PwC
This report explores consumer spending behaviour in India and its potential impact on various stakeholders while providing 
insights into the consumption patterns and financial management practices of tech-savvy Indian customers who have 
utilised banks, NBFCs, and FinTechs to procure loans and other credit products. 
Driven by rising middle- and high-income households, expanding rural markets, enhanced physical and digital 
infrastructure and growing consumer aspirations, India’s consumer market is expected to become the world’s third-largest 
by 2027.1 It can also be noted that as the consumption market in India grows, there is a decline in the financial assets and 
savings held by Indians.2 This report takes a close look at Indian consumption spending by analysing the transaction-level 
data of consumers based on their income brackets and geographic location. 
The report focuses on providing tailored insights for different consumer segments by examining their spending habits 
and offering recommendations to financial institutions for different expense categories. Using these insights and 
recommendations, stakeholders such as financial institutions and policymakers can tailor their offerings, and consumers 
can make informed decisions regarding their spending and investments. These changes can help contribute to the growth 
and development of the Indian consumer market.
We would like to express our gratitude to Perfios for inviting PwC India to be the knowledge partner for the first edition of 
this report. We hope that this report gives the reader a comprehensive overview of how India spends, and look forward to 
hearing your feedback on what we can cover in future editions.
Vivek Belgavi 
Leader – FinTech and Alliances and Ecosystems
PwC India
Mihir Gandhi
Leader – Payments Transformation
PwC India
1  https://www.cnbc.com/2023/09/07/india-consumer-market-to-be-the-worlds-third-largest-by-2027-report-.html
2  https://bfsi.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/industry/indian-household-savings-hit-half-a-century-low-as-debt-rises/103925645?utm_source=copy&utm_
medium=pshare
4   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Table of contents
01
Executive summary...................................................06
03
Introduction...............................................................11
02
Glossary....................................................................10
04
Why Indians are spending money.............................14
06
How Indians are spending money.............................52
05
Where Indians are spending money..........................16
07
Key takeaways..........................................................78
6   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Economic factors
• 
Income level – improving income levels in the country 
positively impacting consumption
• 
Inflation and prices – growth in inflation can have an inverse 
effect on consumption
• 
Employment and job security – employment rate in India has 
shown an uptick, leading to increased consumption
Technology factors
• 
Access to technology, growth of e-commerce and rise 
of FinTech solutions have positively influenced Indian 
consumption
Psychological factors
• 
Satisfying basic needs – based on Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs
• 
Emotional spending – consumer’s state of mind can impact 
consumption patterns
Government policies and regulations
• 
Regulations and policies can streamline tax structures and 
impact pricing of products consumed
Social factors
• 
Family and peer influence, social status, lifestyle and cultural 
trends influence Indian consumers
Marketing and advertising
• 
Advertising campaigns can impact consumption patterns of 
individuals
Figure 1: Demand and supply drivers for Indian consumer’s spending behaviour
Source: PwC Analysis
Demand
Supply
01
Executive summary
This report attempts to provide an in-depth analysis of 
the consumption patterns of Indians by examining the 
spending behaviour of 30 lakh tech-savvy consumers. 
For the analysis, these customers were segmented based 
on available demographic information on income levels 
and geographic locations. The report delves into the 
underlying reasons behind the consumption patterns of 
users by analysing their expenditures across different 
spending categories, and the payment modes used for 
various transactions. The insights into the consumption 
behaviour of consumers are used to provide strategic 
recommendations for FIs which are designed to help them 
develop curated value propositions and better partnerships 
to meet the evolving needs of consumers by capitalising on 
market trends. The highlights from the key sections of this 
report are outlined below.
The chart below highlights some of the key demand- and supply-side factors influencing consumer spending.
Why Indians spend: Demand and supply drivers
7   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Analysing where consumers spend money can aid in 
c.  expenses related to dining out or ordering food
understanding their priorities and lifestyle choices, thereby 
d.  entertainment
providing insights for FIs to curate their offerings based on 
e.  liquor and spirits
evolving customer needs. The report analyses the spending 
f.  travel.
by consumers across three key categories – obligatory, 
discretionary and necessity expenses, which contribute 
3.  Necessity expenses:
 
 This includes expenditure on the 
39%, 29% and 32% of all consumer expenses.
following categories:
1.  Obligatory expenses: 
 
This category comprises EMI 
a.  expenses on utilities
payments towards different forms of loans taken. The 
b.  expenses related to everyday essentials
analysis indicates that an individual’s credit needs 
c.  rental expenses
increase with their income levels, while the penetration of 
loans across different city tiers remains consistent. 
d.  medical expenses
e.  fuel expenses.
2.  Discr
 
etionary expenses: These expenses are non-
In addition, the report explores the key investment avenues 
essential in nature and mainly include:
for consumers with specific insights into jewellery and 
a.   lifestyle purchases related to general purchases, fashion 
general investments like mutual funds, shares and fixed 
and personal care
deposits.
b.  spending on online gaming
 
Where Indians spend: Analysis of different expense categories – insights and 
recommendations
8   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
1.   Transaction sources: This section analyses the 
spending categories in terms of both value and volume 
trends observed for different sources of transactions. It 
of transactions. Everyday essentials, food (dining out/
highlights that the penetration rate and average amount 
ordering in) and credit card payments are some of the 
spent using credit cards increase as we move from a 
highest contributing categories for expenditures via 
lower salary bucket to a higher one. This section also 
these digital payment modes.
shows that both cash deposits and cash withdrawals 
3.   Mode of payment: This section focuses on the different 
increase with an increase in salary.
modes of payment used for different types of spending 
2.   Key mode of transactions: This part of the report 
and investment purposes. It shows that UPI is the 
examines the preference for digital payment methods 
most popular mode of payment for both discretionary 
such as UPI, POS and PGs by comparing the spending 
and necessity spending as well as for investments in 
levels of customers on each of these transaction modes. 
jewellery, whereas for obligatory expenditures both UPI 
It shows the split of expenditures across different 
and ECS are quite popular.
Based on the analysis of the total expenditure by individuals in the report, we can make the following key observations:
How Indians spend: Analysis of transaction modes and sources
Figure 2: Key Observations from the analysis conducted
Source: PwC and Perfios Analysis
People spend the highest amount of money 
on their obligatory expenditures, which 
accounts for 39% of their total spending, 
followed by 32% for necessity expenditures 
and 29% for discretionary expenditures. 
The percentage of people performing 
transactions for online gaming is the 
highest for entry-level earners at 22%. This 
gradually decreases to 12% as we move 
from entry-level earners to high-income 
earners. 
Average total amount spent on house rent 
is 4.5% higher in Tier-2 cities than it is in 
Tier-1 cities.
Individuals across all city tiers allocate 
more than 33% of their income towards 
paying loan EMIs.
Key observations
People living in Tier-2 cities spend the 
highest amount of money on average on 
medical expenses, with INR 2,450 being 
spent by a person per month. On the other 
hand, metros have the lowest expenditure 
on medicals, with an average of INR 2,048 
being spent per person on a monthly basis.
More than 62% of discretionary 
expenditures are allocated towards 
expenditures related to lifestyle purchases, 
which include shopping for fashion and 
personal care items. 
As the salary increases from entry-level 
earners to high-income earners, both 
the amount of money spent on food 
expenditure (ordering or eating out) and the 
frequency at which it is spent increase.
The most popular mode of payment used 
for obligatory spending is Electronic 
Clearing Service. However, for both 
discretionary and necessary expenditures, 
UPI is the most preferred method.
9   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
9   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
By consolidating the insights from the various sections of this report, individuals can get a balanced view of India’s 
consumption landscape. Based on these insights, BFSI stakeholders can aim at enhancing their value proposition in the 
following areas to encourage and improve the consumption of FS products.
The above recommendations can help BFSI players to better manage the evolving needs of customers across various 
geographies and income levels, thereby driving meaningful engagement and improved consumption.
Figure 3: Key Takeaways for BFSI players
Source: PwC and Perfios Analysis
Improving access to credit
Inclusive financial planning
Partnerships and value-added 
services for better customer 
engagement
Tailored loan products: Banks and other 
loan providers can continue to customise 
their loan offerings for different customer 
segments. For entry-level earners and 
emerging professionals, flexible EMIs and 
lower interest rates could attract borrowers 
who might otherwise opt for informal sources. 
For upper mid-level and high-income earners, 
FIs can offer elevated credit limits and flexible 
payment options by partnering with employers 
to help finance larger expenditures such as 
real estate and automobiles.
BNPL: To finance the various expenditure 
needs of people and help them transition from 
the informal credit sector to the formal sector, 
BNPL options can be offered by FIs. This can 
be specifically targeted at entry-level earners 
and those in lower-tier cities.
EV financing: To leverage the growing EV 
sector in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities, FIs can offer 
competitive interest rates, reduced down 
payments and flexible payment options.
PFM apps: These apps can aid users to 
track income, expenses, loans and savings. 
Through data-driven insights for budgeting, 
debt consolidation and other financial advice, 
they can improve customer engagement and 
support in expense management.
Bill payment systems: Consolidating utility 
bill payments into a single platform with 
features like automatic payment reminders 
can enhance convenience and reduce late 
fees.
Wealth management platforms: FIs can 
capitalise on the increasing investment 
trends, especially seen among upper-mid-
level earners, by offering them alternative 
investment options such as private debt, 
startup equity, corporate bonds, and other 
fixed-income alternatives. This will enable Fis 
to engage better with customers.
Loyalty and reward programmes: FIs can 
focus on high transaction categories like 
online gaming, lifestyle purchases, groceries 
and dining to offer discounts, cashback 
benefits and reward points. Focused business 
partnerships with entities in these sectors 
and tiered cashback programmes can help 
improve customer engagement. 
Payment gateways and POS solutions: FIs 
can improve transaction volumes through 
strategic partnerships with game developers, 
food aggregators and retail chains. They 
can also focus on offering customised POS 
solutions with value-added services which can 
enhance merchant and customer experiences.
Healthcare ecosystem partnerships: 
Through partnerships in the healthcare sector, 
Fis can offer credit products for medical 
expenses, integrating payments through 
digital wallets and health cards, and providing 
low-cost insurance-related services in 
integrated healthcare models.
10   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Sr. no.
Acronym
Description
1
BFSI
Banking, financial services, and insurance
2
BNPL
Buy now, pay later
3
CAGR
Compound annual growth rate
4
CMIE-CPHS
Centre for Monitoring Indian Economy’s Consumer Pyramids Household Survey
5
Demat
Dematerialised accounts
6
EMI
Equated monthly instalment
7
EV
Electric vehicle
8
FI
Financial institutions
9
FS
Financial services
10
FY
Financial year
11
GDP
Gross domestic product
12
GST
Goods and services tax
13
IMPS
Immediate Payment Service
14
INR
Indian rupee
15
LPG
Liquefied petroleum gas
16
MF
Mutual funds
17
MoSPI
Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation 
18
MoX
Mode of transaction
19
NBFC
Non-banking financial companies
20
NEFT
National Electronic Fund Transfer
21
NSE
National Stock Exchange
22
OTT
Over the top
23
PF
Provident funds
24
PFM
Personal financial management
25
PG
Payment gateway
26
POS
Point of sale
27
RBI
Reserve Bank of India
28
RPA
Robotic Process Automation
29
SaaS
Software-as-a-service
30
SI
Standing instructions
31
SME
Small and medium enterprises
32
UPI
Unified Payment Interface
Note: The following conversion has been applied to convert any USD-denominated data from sources referenced in the report to 
INR: USD 1 = INR 82.
02
Glossary
11   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
03
Introduction
By 2027, India’s consumer market is poised to become 
last 50 years, according to RBI data.8 While average salaries 
the world’s third largest owing to factors such as growth in 
vary depending on factors such as job type, function, 
income of middle- and high-income households, expanding 
industry and city, it is crucial to consider the parallel rise 
rural markets, improved reach bolstered by both digital and 
in debt and borrowings among Indian households. As of 
physical infrastructure, and growing consumer aspirations.3 
September 2024, the total outstanding amount for personal 
India stands out as a burgeoning consumption environment, 
loans is INR 55.3 lakh crore with a year-on-year growth 
which is demonstrated by the 60% contribution of private 
rate of 13.7%. Home loans observed a slower year-on-year 
consumption to GDP in 20234 (comparable to the global 
growth rate of 12.8% and have a total outstanding amount 
average of around 63%).5 Projections indicate that by 
of 28.1 lakh crore.9 
2031, India is expected to have an INR 426.4 lakh crore 
Additionally, the widespread availability of affordable 
consumption economy, growing at a CAGR of 13.4% 
smartphones and accessible telecom services has enabled 
from 2023 to 2031.6 This growth could be propelled by 
over 82 crore Indians to access the internet, with the 
incremental consumption by the Indian middle class, 
percentage of smartphones in actual use exceeding 72% 
increased urbanisation, and a growing percentage of the 
of the total population.10,11 This growth is occurring amidst 
young populace with rising aspirations.
a digital literacy rate of 38% in India, with urban literacy 
In India, the salaries of individuals over the past six years 
rates being relatively high at 61%.12 FS has capitalised on 
(between 2019 and 2024) have been increasing year-on-
this trend by providing services through web and mobile 
year at a rate of over 9.1%.7 This consistent growth in 
applications, thus fuelling a personal credit boom.
income levels among Indians has been a key driver of 
This report attempts to answer the following crucial 
increased household consumption and could have also 
question: As salaries rise and debt accumulates, what 
contributed to driving demand for various goods and 
do Indians spend their money on? Apart from this, the 
services. 
report delves into the opportunities for FIs and FinTechs 
However, this trend occurs amidst a backdrop of Indian 
to leverage growing consumption and further enable 
households experiencing a decline in their financial assets, 
products, go-to-market strategies and customer experience 
which now stand at 5.1% of the country’s GDP in 2023. This 
enhancement.
is down from 7.2% in 2022 – the lowest levels seen in the 
3    https://www.cnbc.com/2023/09/07/india-consumer-market-to-be-the-worlds-third-largest-by-2027-report-.html
4    https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2024-02-29/india-consumption-data-is-a-wake-up-call-for-companies
5    https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/share-of-household-consumption-in-gdp-vs-gdp-per-capita?tab=table | PwC analysis on available data
6    https://thesecretariat.in/article/dateline-2031-india-s-middle-class-will-make-it-much-richer
7    https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/jobs/hr-policies-trends/india-leads-in-salary-growth-projections-in-apac-these-sectors-will-give-higher-hikes-this-year/
articleshow/107880129.cms
8    https://bfsi.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/industry/indian-household-savings-hit-half-a-century-low-as-debt-rises/103925645?utm_source=copy&utm_
medium=pshare
9    https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/personal-loan-sees-14-growth-cards-gold-major-factors-behind-surge/
articleshow/112991638.cms?from=mdr
10  https://telecom.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/internet/45-of-indians-still-do-not-access-internet-iamai-kantar-study/108035843?utm_source=copy&utm_
medium=pshare
11  https://www.pwc.in/assets/pdfs/industries/financial-services/fintech/b-ank%E2%80%93fintech-collaborations-for-promoting-financial-inclusion.pdf
12  https://dtnbwed.cbwe.gov.in/images/upload/Digital-Literacy_3ZNK.pdf
11   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
12   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
3.1  Methodology
3.2  Sampling
Transaction data can offer valuable insights into an 
individual’s financial habits, which in turn can be used 
to determine their spending profile and consumption 
behaviour. For instance, monitoring changes in financial 
assets and debt levels can highlight the shift in spending 
habits and financial management practices, thereby helping 
gain comprehensive insight into consumer behaviour. This 
could include an understanding of spending categories, 
transaction channels and modes, and customers’ 
preferences towards the same.
Additionally, this report segments consumer data based 
on income levels and geographic locations, thus providing 
tailored insights reflecting the diverse financial landscapes 
within the country. This approach aims to offer findings 
that are relevant and actionable for various stakeholders, 
including FIs, policymakers and consumers themselves.
The objectives of this report are threefold:
1.  Highlight the amount of money spent on different 
categories (obligatory, necessity and discretionary).
2.  Examine the spending of consumers across various 
income segments and geographical locations for each 
type of merchant category.
3.  Explore the payment instrument or mode used for 
transactions across different categories.
The dataset analysed in this report comprises tech-savvy 
borrowers who primarily apply for loans through FinTech 
and NBFCs using digital platforms. These borrowers 
were distributed across different geographies (from Tier-
3 to metro cities) and income levels (from less than INR 
20,000 to more than INR 1,00,000). Additionally, the 
data considered for this analysis pertains to the year 
2023 (January to December). To extract and analyse 
insights while maintaining the confidentiality and privacy 
of the concerned individuals, we have aggregated and 
anonymised the data of the individual customer, so that 
the inferences and insights are drawn from an aggregate 
of the sample and not on individual data points. Apart from 
that, Perfios and PwC have also ensured that no personally 
identifiable information was used during the analysis.
The analysis of the bank statements of 30 lakh users helped 
identify the following for each transaction in the statements:
1.  Category: Defines the purpose of the transaction, such 
as shopping, groceries, gaming and travel.
2.  Form factors of payments: Defines the mode of the 
transaction, such as cash, credit card, debit card and 
bank transfer.
3.  Counterparty: Identifies the party involved in the 
transaction while also aiding in differentiating between 
individuals and merchants, and providing additional 
information regarding the same (e.g. retail, service, utility 
merchants). 
4.  Transaction channel preference: Provides information 
regarding the user’s preference in terms of mode of 
transaction, whether online (e-commerce, website, 
mobile apps, etc.) or offline (in-store shopping).
5.  Payment app: Identifies the specific app or online 
platform used by the customer to facilitate the 
transaction. 
13   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
The report analyses the consumer data based on 
segmentation and other key parameters mentioned 
above to present a comprehensive understanding of 
the consumption and spending behaviour of tech-savvy 
Indians who have borrowed money or have applied for 
loans through FinTechs and NBFCs. The report will delve 
into the intricacies of these consumption patterns through 
three fundamental queries on the spending habits of the 
consumers:
Transactions done via credit cards and cash have not 
been analysed in the section ‘Where Indians are spending 
money’. These transactions have been separately explained 
in the sub-section ‘Transaction sources’ of the section ‘How 
Indians are spending money’. This approach has been 
considered since bank statements do not provide visibility 
into where the withdrawn cash has been used to make 
transactions. Additionally, for credit cards, bank statements 
show only the lumpsum credit card bill that has been paid. 
Hence, it does not provide us with any details of where the 
money was spent.
Additionally, other key demographic attributes of the 
customer, including their geographic location and salary, 
were considered to augment the comprehensiveness of 
the analysis. Segmenting the sample population according 
to city tier types and salary buckets can provide more 
nuanced insights.
The geographic locations of the consumers were 
categorised based on the population density as follows:
•  Metropolitan cities (Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai, Chennai, 
Bengaluru, Hyderabad, Ahmedabad and Pune)13
•  Tier 1 (cities with a population of 10,00,000 and above)
•  Tier 2 (cities with a population of 5,00,000-9,99,999)
•  Tier 3 (cities with a population of 4,99,999 and below).
Since the city tier for 29.64% of individuals could not be 
identified, all analyses specific to geographic location have 
been done for the remaining 70.36% of individuals, i.e. for 
21.11 lakh users. 
To facilitate the segmentation of consumers, monthly salary 
buckets were identified. These salary buckets aided in 
categorising individuals based on their earnings, providing 
a more comprehensible picture of their financial behaviours 
and needs. The salary buckets considered were:
1.  Entry-level earners (earnings up to INR 20,000 per 
month): This group mainly comprises blue-collar 
professionals and college students with part-time jobs.
2.  Emerging professionals (earnings between INR 20,001 
and 40,000 per month): This group mostly comprises 
first-time or young employees, as well as grey-collar 
workers.
Figure 4: Distribution of data across city tiers
18.29%
6.22%
12.31%
33.54%
29.64%
Metro
Tier 1
Tier 2
Tier 3
Unknown
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data
Figure 5: Distribution of data across income levels
36.27%
36.41%
17.72%
4.15%
5.45%
Entry-level 
Emerging 
Established 
Mid-level 
High-income 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
3.  Mid-level earners (earnings between INR 40,001 and INR 
75,000 per month): These are individuals who have been 
in the workforce for a couple of years.
4.  Upper mid-level earners (earnings between INR 75,001 
and 1,00,000 per month): This group includes those with 
considerable experience in the workforce.
5.  High-income earners (earnings above INR 1,00,000 per 
month): This segment consists of high-income earners 
such as senior professionals.
01
02
03
why
where
how
13  https://pib.gov.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=175403
14   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
04
Why Indians are spending money
A variety of demand- and supply-related factors influence people to spend money on various things. Understanding these 
factors could help in analysing consumption patterns and market trends. Listed below are some of the key supply- and 
demand-side factors that motivate spending among Indian consumers.
4.1.1.1	 Income levels: Over the past six years (2019–24), 
the salary of individuals in India has been increasing year-
on-year at a rate of over 9.1 %.14 This steady growth in 
the income of individuals is one of the key determinants 
of consumer spending behaviour. Additionally, India’s per 
capita disposable income for the year 2023–24 has surged 
to INR 2.14 lakh, showing a robust growth rate of 13.3% for 
the year FY23. Simultaneously, India’s gross savings have 
declined by 30% for 2023–24.15 This decline in savings 
indicates a shifting trend in consumer spending patterns in 
terms of increased expenditure, with more spending being 
directed to both essential and discretionary items. 
4.1.1.2	 Inflation and prices: According to the RBI, 
retail inflation stood at 5.6% for the year 2023–24.16 This 
increased inflation level can potentially have an adverse 
impact on the growth of discretionary spending, as 
consumers may cut back on non-essential items when 
prices rise. However, according to the RBI, the inflation 
level is expected to decrease to 4.6% for 2024–25.17 
This anticipated reduction in inflation levels could boost 
consumption patterns and thereby foster further economic 
growth.
4.1  Demand side
4.1.1	 Economic factors
4.1.1.3	 Employment and job security: Between the years 
2017–19 and 2022–23, the employment rate has grown 
from 46.8% to 56%, while the unemployment rate declined 
from 6% to 3.2%.18 This increased employment rate can 
lead to increased consumer spending among individuals, 
driven by factors such as increased disposable income, 
financial stability, and increased demand for education, 
healthcare, and other discretionary products and services.
4.1.2.1	 Satisfying basic needs: As illustrated by Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs,19 basic needs such as necessity 
spending on food and shelter are prioritised by consumers 
over discretionary spending on luxury items.
4.1.2.2	 Emotional spending: Consumers, in general, are 
influenced by the state of their mind (happiness, stress, 
anxiety, etc.) which can influence their spending behaviour. 
For instance, many consumers may engage in retail therapy 
where they buy products from their favourite brands to lift 
their mood.
4.1.2	 Psychological factors
14  https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/jobs/hr-policies-trends/india-leads-in-
salary-growth-projections-in-apac-these-sectors-will-give-higher-hikes-this-
year/articleshow/107880129.cms
15  https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/
data-correction-indias-per-capita-disposable-income-put-at-2-14-l/
articleshow/108147382.cms?from=mdr
16   https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/inflation-is-
hurting-consumption-strong-likelihood-that-it-may-hold-back-indias-growth-
rbi/articleshow/106155259.cms?from=mdr
17   https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/economy/indicators/inflation-is-
hurting-consumption-strong-likelihood-that-it-may-hold-back-indias-growth-
rbi/articleshow/106155259.cms?from=mdr
18   https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/india-witnesses-significant-
growth-in-jobs-and-decline-in-unemployment-rate-government-stats-show/
articleshow/109566617.cms
19   https://edition.cnn.com/world/maslows-hierarchy-of-needs-explained-
wellness-cec/index.html
15   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
In India, there are a variety of social factors such as 
family and peer influence, social status, lifestyle and 
cultural trends that can shape the spending behaviour 
of customers. For instance, the way parents spend and 
save money can have a direct influence on the spending 
behaviour of their children. Similarly, peer pressure can 
influence younger consumers to increase their spending to 
maintain or enhance their social status. Additionally, India’s 
cultural norms can impact consumer spending patterns. For 
instance, the Indian retail market recorded trades worth INR 
3.75 lakh crore during the 2023 Diwali season.20 
Access to technology and innovation in products and 
services, such as the rise of FinTech solutions, are 
influencing how people spend their money. Additionally, the 
role of digital public infrastructures (DPI) like Open Network 
for Digital Commerce (ONDC), which is democratising 
digital commerce by enabling small retailers to access 
digital marketplaces, is also enhancing the distribution and 
reach, fuelling consumption. The growth of e-commerce, 
which is being fuelled by growing access to the internet and 
smartphones, has revolutionised the consumer shopping 
experience. For instance, e-commerce sales in India 
which is currently (2024) at INR 4,41.7 thousand crore are 
expected to grow at a potential CAGR of 11.45% in the 
period between 2024 and 2029, to reach a value of INR 
7,59.2 thousand crore.21 
Government policies and regulations have the potential 
to impact consumer spending, borrowing and investment 
decisions. Streamlining tax structures such as GST can 
impact the pricing of products being bought by consumers, 
thereby impacting their purchasing decisions. Regulations 
related to the quality and safety of products can also 
influence consumer spending as consumers would spend 
more on products that comply with specific regulatory and 
quality standards.
4.1.3	 Social factors
4.2  Supply side
4.2.1  Technology factors
4.2.2	 Government policies and regulations
Consumer spending can also be influenced through 
advertisement and marketing campaigns, which can 
improve consumer awareness, help drive sales and 
manage brand loyalty. Advertisement expenses in India are 
expected to grow by 10.2% in 2024 to reach a value of INR 
1,55,386 crore.22 This indicates the effort by companies to 
capture market share and influence consumer behaviour, 
thereby stimulating increased consumer demand and 
contributing to the growth of the economy.
While there are multiple factors that influence why 
consumers are spending, it is equally important to 
understand and analyse where consumers are spending 
their money. The next section explores the various 
categories across which Indian consumers are spending 
their money.
4.2.3	 Marketing and advertising
20  https://www.cnbctv18.com/business/diwali-2023-season-retail-online-stores-sales-all-time-high-18319201.htm
21  https://www.forbes.com/advisor/in/business/ecommerce-statistics/
22  https://www.livemint.com/industry/ad-spending-in-india-to-grow-at-a-slower-pace-in-2024-says-groupm-11707829330565.html
16   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
05
Where Indians are spending money
Indian consumers spend money on a wide variety of merchant categories such as lifestyle purchases, groceries, rent, 
travel, entertainment, mobile gaming and medical expenses. It can also be noted that Indians actively invest a portion of 
their savings into multiple asset classes, including mutual funds, gold, equity and real estate. This section of the report 
analyses the different categories where Indians are allocating their expenses and investments across cities and income 
levels.
The expenses made by individuals for various purposes can be grouped under three major heads:
Obligatory: This header encompasses repayment of loans, payment of premiums for insurance policies taken and other 
expenses that an individual would legally be obliged to pay.
Discretionary: This header comprises the various expenses made by individuals to satisfy needs that go beyond basic 
survival, such as expenses related to online gaming, dining out or ordering in food, entertainment, travel and lifestyle 
purchases. 
Necessity: This header includes expenses made by individuals to meet their basic needs such as utilities (water, electricity, 
gas, etc.), fuel, medicine and groceries.
Indians invest in a variety of physical assets 
like land and jewellery, and capital assets 
like mutual funds, stocks, fixed deposits and 
cryptocurrency. The increased interest among 
people in investing in these assets can be 
attributed to several factors such as increased 
financial literacy, a rise in disposable income 
and the growth of digital platforms that 
provide individuals with diverse investment 
options that cater to their distinct needs.
Spending: Where do Indians spend their money? 
Investing: Beyond spending
17   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
The graph below illustrates the distribution of spending across various categories as a percentage of total 
expenditure. 
5.1  Spending: Where do Indians spend their money?
Traditionally, necessity and obligatory expenses are 
considered to be more important expenditures than 
discretionary expenses, reflecting the importance of 
prioritising obligations and fulfilling necessary requirements. 
However, the lines between discretionary spending and 
future obligations have been blurred by the rise of personal 
lending through form factors such as embedded finance, 
peer-to-peer loans and credit cards, and other traditional 
loan categories like home loans, education loans and auto 
loans. This is because some of the loans and credit that 
would have initially been availed for discretionary purposes 
can evolve into obligations with time.
Based on the analysis of the main dataset, on an average, 
salaried individuals allocated between 34% and 45% 
of their income to obligatory expenses, between 22% 
and 44% to necessities, and between 22% to 33% to 
discretionary expenses. However, this distribution pattern 
varies across different salary brackets.
The above chart shows that individuals in lower salary 
brackets are primarily channelling most of their earnings 
toward meeting essential needs or servicing debt. 
Conversely, those in higher salary bands are allocating a 
significant portion of their income toward obligatory and 
discretionary spending.
The percentage of money spent on discretionary expenses 
increases progressively from the entry-level earners to the 
high-income earners, from 22% to 33%. A similar trend is 
observed for obligatory expenses, where the percentage 
of spending goes from 34% for entry-level earners to 45% 
for high-income earners. However, a converse trend is 
observed for necessity expenses, where the percentage 
of money spent decreases with an increase in salary – 
declining from 44% for entry-level earners to 22% for high-
income earners.
Figure 6: Split of total expenditure across categories
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
39.00%
29.00%
32.00%
Obligatory
Discretionary
Necessity
Figure 7: Split of expenditure across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Obligatory
Discretionary
Necessity
22%
29%
31%
33%
33%
44%
36%
28%
23%
22%
34%
35%
41%
44%
45%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
120%
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
18   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Overview: A large part of the obligatory expenditure 
in India is driven by EMIs paid towards various loans, 
including housing loans, vehicle loans and personal loans. 
The growing access to credit has fuelled an increase in 
loan uptake. For instance, as per data from the RBI, the 
share of personal loans in total credit increased to 32.6% 
in February 2024 from 30.6% in 2023.23 Additionally, as of 
2023, home loans account for a significant percentage of 
total retail loans in India at 47.2%.24 Based on a survey on 
EMI payments conducted in 2023, EMIs have increased for 
42% of respondents.25 This growth in personal loans and 
increasing interest rates indicates that a large portion of 
Indian household income gets allocated towards payment 
of EMIs.
Analysis: The analysis of consumers’ obligatory expenses 
– specifically focusing on loan repayments through EMI – 
reveals an upward trend in terms of total spending on EMI 
as salary increases from the lowest (entry-level earners) to 
the highest (high-income earners) salary bucket. Hence, a 
positive correlation can be observed between income level 
and EMI expenditure.
The analysis of loan EMI payments across different city tiers 
shows that there is minimal variation in terms of spending 
percentage. For all city tiers, the percentage of income 
allocated to EMI payments ranges between 33% and 38%. 
This indicates that irrespective of the type of city individuals 
live in, loan EMIs account for a substantial and relatively 
uniform percentage of their total expenditure.
5.1.1	 Obligatory
Figure 8: Distribution of loan EMI payments as a percentage of total spending across income levels
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
34%
35%
40%
44%
46%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Percentage of total spending
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
23  https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/personal-loans-make-up-third-of-bank-credit/articleshow/108925985.cms#:~:text=According%20to%20
monthly%20data%20released,from%2030.6%25%20a%20year%20earlier.
24  https://www.business-standard.com/industry/banking/home-loan-share-in-retail-decline-to-47-2-in-november-shows-data-124010400933_1.html
25  https://www.business-standard.com/finance/personal-finance/inflation-and-interest-rate-burden-74-see-loans-become-more-expensive-123090600496_1.html
19   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 9: Distribution of loan EMI payments as a 
percentage of total spending across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
34.80%
33.55%
36.20%
37.88%
31%
32%
33%
34%
35%
36%
37%
38%
39%
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
Percentage of money spent
Figure 10: Percentage of people paying existing loan EMIs across income levels
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
69%
72%
77%
80%
79%
62%
64%
66%
68%
70%
72%
74%
76%
78%
80%
82%
Percentage of people
The percentage of individuals paying loan EMIs is highest 
among upper mid-level earners and lowest among entry-
level earners, indicating higher engagement among 
individuals in higher income brackets for loan repayment 
through EMIs. It could also indicate that people in the 
lower salary brackets are more likely to take loans from 
informal sources, such as friends, family, or local shadow 
lenders, which is not accounted for in this analysis since 
transactions related to their repayment generally do not 
get captured in bank statements and even if they do, 
the purpose of such payments cannot be linked to loan 
repayments.
Similar to the trend observed in the total expenditure on loan repayments through EMIs across different city tiers, the 
percentage of individuals paying for loans across different salary buckets are in comparable bands. The percentage 
of people making loan payments reveals a slight upward trend from 72.11% in Tier-3 cities to 74.17% in metro cities, 
indicating relatively uniform engagement in loan repayments among residents of various city types in India.
Figure 11: Percentage of people paying existing loan 
EMIs across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
72.11%
72.71%
73.05%
74.17%
69%
70%
71%
72%
73%
74%
75%
76%
77%
78%
Percentage of people
Insights
From the analysis above, it can be observed that high-
income earners have the highest spending on loan EMIs. 
This indicates that with growth in income, the demand for 
credit support also increases. This trend could be attributed 
to the rising aspirations of individuals leading to increased 
spending on both discretionary and necessity expenditures, 
which eventually translates into obligatory spending. In 
addition to rising aspirations, another reason for the higher 
penetration of loans in higher-income segments could be 
their higher living expenses. These expenses can be related 
to their premium lifestyle choices, such as expensive travel 
budgets, premium education, and a preference for niche 
and higher-quality products and services. These factors 
result in increased expenditures and potentially higher debt.
Lower penetration of loans amongst people with lower 
salaries and people living in smaller-tiered cities could 
indicate that these individuals rely on alternative options 
due to challenges in the availability and accessibility of 
loan options. The penetration of formal loans in lower-
tiered cities is low; hence, these individuals may depend 
on informal credit options, such as loans from friends, 
family and shadow lenders. For individuals in a lower 
salary band, a probable lack of collateral could hinder their 
ability to obtain formal loans, compelling them to choose 
informal credit sources. Consequently, this spending is not 
accounted for in this analysis. This presents an opportunity 
for lenders to explore financial products tailored to people 
in these segments, who may be underserved currently. 
Additionally, the observation that loan EMIs are higher 
for people living in metros could be attributed to factors 
such as higher property costs leading to larger home 
loans, increased educational expenses, costlier medical 
and healthcare facilities, and higher maintenance costs 
associated with living in these cities.
20   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
21   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 12: Breakup of total discretionary spending
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Lifestyle purchases
62.82%
Food: Dining out/
ordering in,
13.07%
Online gaming
13.73%
Others
3.38%
Travel
1.20%
Liquor and spirits
2.73%
Entertainment
3.07%
Lifestyle purchases
Food: Dining out/ ordering in
Online gaming
Entertainment
Liquor and spirits
Travel
Others
This report analyses discretionary spending by splitting 
it into different discretionary expense categories such as 
lifestyle purchases, online gaming, dining out or ordering 
in, entertainment, liquor and spirits, and travel. A major 
part of discretionary expenses can be attributed to lifestyle 
purchases related to general purchases, fashion and 
personal care items, which together account for 62.82% 
of the total discretionary expenses. It is followed by online 
gaming with 13.73% of the total expenses. The upcoming 
sections provide a breakdown of each of these categories, 
offering insights into how individuals allocate their funds for 
various discretionary spends.
5.1.2	 Discretionary
5.1.2.1	 Lifestyle purchases  
Overview: Analysis shows a direct correlation between an increase in salary and spending on lifestyle purchases. It shows 
that higher-income earners spend nearly three times as much on lifestyle purchases as entry-level earners. These expenses 
can also be tied to the type of city people live in. The average amount spent on lifestyle purchases is higher for people 
living in metro and Tier-1 cities as compared to that for people living in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities.
Figure 13: Average amount spent per month on lifestyle purchases across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
958
1,270
1,917
2,384
3,207
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Amount spent in INR
22   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 14: Average amount spent per month on lifestyle 
purchases across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
1,882
1,917
1,988
2,022
1,820
1,870
1,920
1,970
2,020
2,070
Amount spent in INR
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
Figure 15: Split of total expenditure across different lifestyle purchase categories
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Personal care
2%
Others
2%
Electronics
8%
General
68%
Fashion
20%
General
Fashion
Electronics
Personal care
Others
From the data, it can be inferred that there is a 6.4% 
increase in the average amount spent on lifestyle 
purchases by a person living in a metro, which is 
INR 2,022, compared to that spent by a person 
residing in a Tier-3 city, where this figure is INR 1,882 
monthly. Some of the factors that influence the 
lifestyle-related shopping behaviour of people include 
consumer preference, brand consciousness, access 
to products and online shopping. The number of 
online shoppers is growing in India. In rural India, it is 
expected to reach 8.8 crore people by 2026, growing 
at a CAGR of 22% from 2019 to 2026. In urban India, 
this number is expected to reach 26.3 crore people 
by 2026, growing at a CAGR of 15% from 2019 to 
2026.26 This shows that the e-commerce market is 
expanding, but the rate of growth is higher for metro 
and higher-tier cities (urban areas) as compared to 
that for lower-tier cities (rural areas). Higher-tier cities 
often benefit from greater convenience and a wider 
product range through online platforms, whereas 
lower-tier cities mostly rely on traditional brick-and-
mortar stores.
Next, the spending patterns for the three categories that account for a major part of lifestyle purchases – general spending, 
fashion and personal care – are explored in greater depth.
Trends
The graph below provides a breakdown of the subcategories under lifestyle purchases and shows how individuals allocate 
funds to these expenses.
26  https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/e-commerce-market-to-hit-325-billion-by-2030-rural-india-to-lead-growth-124042900284_1.html
23   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.2.1.1  General
General shopping includes transactions done at supermarkets and on e-commerce websites. While these transactions are 
tracked, the specific intent and purpose behind the purchase of an individual product could not be captured. Hence, they 
have been categorised as general shopping expenses.
The percentage of spending on general shopping out of the overall shopping expenses decreases as we move from the 
lower salary buckets towards the higher salary buckets. This trend might indicate that high-income earners tend to spend 
less, proportionally, on general expenses on broad e-commerce platforms and may prefer to go for more specialised 
products through applications that offer differentiation and customisation. In contrast, individuals in lower salary buckets 
allocate a higher percentage of their income to general shopping done through supermarkets and e-commerce platforms 
that offer a wider range of mass-produced products. Consequently, specialised platforms for clothing, groceries and fast 
e-commerce could see more prevalence among higher-income earners compared to those in lower-income brackets.
Figure 16: Percentage of overall shopping expenses spent on general lifestyle purchases 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
54.69%
52.34%
45.23%
38.21%
29.96%
0.00%
10.00%
20.00%
30.00%
40.00%
50.00%
60.00%
Percentage of money spent
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
24   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.2.1.2  Fashion 
Of all the lifestyle purchases by consumers, 20% is allocated towards fashion. This subcategory includes transactions for 
purchasing apparel and accessories from designated merchants.
An interesting observation is that the frequency of consumer spending on fashion shopping remains relatively consistent at 
about twice a month across different salary buckets. However, the actual amount spent increases threefold from entry-level 
earners to high-income earners.
For instance, the average amount spent on fashion-related expenses increased from INR 956 for entry-level earners to 
INR 3,321 for high-income earners.
Figure 17: Average number of transactions by a person per month for fashion purchases across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
1.7
1.73
1.81
1.89
1.96
1.5
1.55
1.6
1.65
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
2
Average number of transactions
Figure 18: Average amount spent by a person per month on fashion purchases across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
956
1,335
1,966
2,545
3,321
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Amount spent in INR
25   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
When examining city tiers, spending on fashion demonstrates an upward trend, with the lowest spending observed in Tier-
3 cities and the highest in metro cities. Fashion spending, driven by brand consciousness and product availability, exhibits 
noticeable variation from Tier-2 cities to Tier-1 cities.
Figure 19: Average amount spent by a person per month 
on fashion purchases across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
1,328
1,388
1,532
1,539
1,200
1,250
1,300
1,350
1,400
1,450
1,500
1,550
1,600
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
Amount spent in INR
Figure 21: Average amount spent by a person per month on personal care purchases across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
208
344
548
802
968
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Amount spent in INR
Figure 20: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for fashion purchases across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
1.78
1.77
1.82
1.82
1.74
1.75
1.76
1.77
1.78
1.79
1.8
1.81
1.82
1.83
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
Average number of transactions
5.1.2.2.3  Personal care
Personal care includes not only spending on products but also indulging in experiences such as salon and spa services, 
which can extend to maintaining basic looks and hygiene. As we move up the salary brackets, both the average amount 
spent and the average transaction count per individual increase, indicating a trend of frequent high-value transactions. The 
average number of transactions goes from 1.36 per month to 1.50 per month as we go from entry-level earners to high-
income earners. Similarly, the average of the total amount spent per month goes from INR 208 to INR 968 as we move from 
the lowest (entry-level earners) to the highest salary band (high-income earners).
26   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 22: Average number of transactions by a person per month for personal care purchases across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
1.36
1.34
1.38
1.43
1.5
1.2
1.25
1.3
1.35
1.4
1.45
1.5
1.55
Average number of transactions
Considering its aspirational nature, spending on personal 
care typically grows with increase in income. However, 
while people’s engagement with the category remains 
relatively consistent across income levels, the amount spent 
varies noticeably. This suggests that while personal care is 
a staple across different income groups, individuals select 
their personal care products and services based on their 
income level.
Insights
The above analysis suggests that people with higher 
incomes spend more on fashion and personal care as 
compared to people with lower income levels. This 
indicates that individuals in the higher salary brackets 
make up the largest market for retailers and e-commerce 
platforms, in terms of total value spent. Fashion-related 
expenses account for a higher total spend by both volume 
and value compared to personal care-related shopping, 
across all salary brackets. This suggests that people shop 
more often for fashion as compared to personal care 
products, regardless of their salary brackets. It can also 
indicate that fashion products are generally more expensive 
than personal care products.
Additionally, the average total money spent by a person 
per month on lifestyle purchases, especially for fashion 
purposes, increases as we move from Tier-3 cities to metro 
cities. This indicates a preference for people to buy more 
expensive fashion products in metro cities. It could also 
suggest that metro cities offer more expensive fashion 
products in general compared to other geographies.
27   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.2.2	 Online gaming
Overview: In the past few years, the increasing penetration 
of smartphones, along with the growing availability of 
internet at affordable rates and improved download speeds, 
have largely contributed to the increased trend of online 
gaming in India.27 This increasing trend is further fuelled by 
the tech-savvy new generation. From simple mobile games 
to complex multi-player computer games, online games are 
available in a broad variety of internet-based games. The 
online gaming industry in India has seen fast-paced growth 
at a CAGR of 28% from FY20 to FY23, and it reached a 
market value of INR 16,428 crore by revenue in FY23. It is 
further expected to grow to INR 33,243 crore by FY28 with 
a CAGR of 15%.28 
27  https://telecom.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/industry/indias-ranking-in-download-speed-improves-by-72-spots-as-jio-airtel-ramp-up-5g-rollouts-
ookla/104104882#:~:text=NEW%20DELHI%3A%20India’s%20global%20ranking,latest%20research%20released%20by%20Ookla.
28  https://www.thehindu.com/opinion/op-ed/getting-to-a-new-level-in-indias-online-gaming-sector/article68146583.ece
29  https://inc42.com/buzz/over-99-mobile-phones-used-in-india-are-locally-made-ashwini-vaishnaw/
Figure 23: Percentage of people performing transactions for online gaming-related expenses across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
22%
18%
16%
14%
12%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
% of people transacting
Even though there is a wide variety of sources available to 
play video games on, the online gaming industry in India 
is dominated by mobile games. One possible reason for 
this could be that mobile phones are easily accessible. 
Smartphone penetration in India reached approximately 
71% in 2023.29 Expenditures related to online games are 
generally related to in-app purchases, subscription costs 
associated with app usage or sometimes the cost of the 
game itself.
Analysis: The total number of individuals performing 
transactions for online gaming-related expenses is the 
highest amongst the group of entry-level earners and 
emerging professionals. It can be observed that this number 
decreases as the income level rises. It is the highest for 
entry-level earners at 22% and the lowest for high-income 
earners at 12%.
28   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
The graphs below show people living in Tier-1 cities have the highest average amount of monthly expenditure towards 
online gaming purchases compared to people living in any other city tier. However, the average number of transactions 
done by a person per month is the highest among people residing in metro cities.
Figure 24: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for online gaming-related expenses across 
city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
8.57
10.24
9.44
10.51
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Average number of transactions
Figure 25: Average amount spent by a person per month 
on online gaming-related expenses across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
4,629
4,763
5,081
4,482
4,100
4,200
4,300
4,400
4,500
4,600
4,700
4,800
4,900
5,000
5,100
5,200
Amount spent in INR
Insights
Penetration in the online gaming industry, measured using the 
percentage of people performing transactions, is observed to be 
highest for individuals in the lower salary brackets. This suggests 
that online games are a popular source of recreational activity 
among these individuals. It also suggests that these individuals 
constitute a significant potential market for companies that 
provide such online gaming applications and platforms.
Furthermore, the average number of monthly transactions by a 
person is lower for individuals living in Tier-1 cities compared to 
individuals residing in either Tier-2 or metro cities. On the other 
hand, a completely opposite trend is observed for the average 
total money spent monthly by a person on online gaming, with 
people in Tier-1 cities spending more than their counterparts 
in Tier-2 and metro cities. This indicates that, on average, the 
transactions made by a person in a Tier-1 city are of higher 
monetary value as compared to a person in Tier-2 or metro city. 
This suggests that individuals in Tier-1 cities may engage in 
higher-value transactions related to online gaming as compared 
to those in Tier-2 and metro cities. 
One of the reasons for this could be the increasing popularity of 
fantasy games that provide an opportunity to earn money among 
young people in Tier-1 cities, who generally have better internet 
connections and easier smartphone access. These individuals 
are often the target consumers of gaming companies who aim to 
attract the youth to download and subscribe to services within 
the games. These games are not only a form of recreation for 
the youth but also offer cash prizes, which further motivates 
them to spend on such games. The market for e-sports in India 
is expanding in these areas, potentially contributing to increased 
spending on in-game purchases.
29   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.2.3	 Food: Dining out/ordering in
Overview: The rapid urbanisation of India has led to busier lifestyles, leaving people with less time for personal chores 
like cooking at home. According to data from the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI), in FY23, 
households classified as urban elite segments (those with higher levels of income in metro cities) of the population spent 
nearly 50% of their monthly food budget on packaged goods, eating out and food delivery services. This percentage was 
only 41.2% ten years earlier,30 indicating an increasing trend of people preferring to dine out or order in. The increase in the 
number of food orders can be attributed to arrangements like working from home and a boom in food delivery apps and 
the discounts provided by them. On the other hand, dining out has become a popular form of social activity. 
Analysis: The chart below shows that as salary increases from entry-level earners to high-income earners, both the amount 
of money spent towards food expenditure (ordering or eating out) and the frequency at which it is spent increases. This 
shows that individuals in higher salary brackets tend to not only allocate more towards food expenditures overall but also 
demonstrate a higher spend value per transaction, along with a greater frequency of dining out or ordering in.
30  https://www.business-standard.com/economy/news/indians-spending-more-on-packaged-food-eating-out-as-home-cooking-declines-124041000308_1.html
Figure 26: Average amount spent by a person per month on food-related expenses across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
492
744
1,223
1,497
2,170
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Amount spent in INR
Figure 27: Average number of transactions by a person per month for food-related expenses across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
2.46
3.03
3.69
3.74
4.2
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Average number of transactions
30   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Insights
Food expenditures related to dining out or ordering in 
increase directly in proportion to people’s income levels. 
Individuals with higher salaries tend not only to spend more 
money overall, but also spend more per transaction. This 
suggests that as the income level for individuals rises, they 
have more disposable income to spend on discretionary 
expenses like dining out or ordering in. This also indicates 
that high-income earners might assign a greater value 
to convenience and time-saving options. The increasing 
trend of hybrid work and work from home has blurred lines 
between work and personal life, thereby contributing to 
increased food orders as these individuals would prefer to 
save time by ordering food when they work from home and 
by eating out when they work from office.
5.1.2.4	 Entertainment
Overview: According to a PwC report, the entertainment and media industry in India is expected to grow at a CAGR of 
9.7% from 2023 to 2027, reaching an estimated value of INR 603.5 thousand crore by 2027.31 While mobile phones are 
rapidly gaining popularity as an important source of entertainment for people, spending on entertainment collectively 
includes transactions conducted for the purpose of enjoyment or amusement, including subscribing to music services 
and participating in outdoor activities. In addition to this, the rise of social media culture has led to increased spending on 
experiences and activities for the purpose of entertainment.
Analysis: The graph below shows the percentage of individuals in the various salary groups who engage in transactions 
under this category. Entertainment typically falls under the category of premiumisation, in which the customer’s experience 
is enhanced by offering them more than what is available, affordable or necessary to others. This trend is evident from the 
graph below, where the propensity for expenditure is lowest at 22% for entry-level earners, while it almost doubles to 43% 
for high-income earners.
Figure 28: Percentage of people performing transactions for entertainment-related expenses across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
22%
28%
36%
41%
43%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
% of people transacting
31  https://www.pwc.in/industries/entertainment-and-media/india-edition-GEMO23.html
31   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
The graph below shows the major heads under the entertainment category.
The majority of the spending in the entertainment category 
person per month almost remains comparable across all 
is on in-app purchases on app stores, followed by spending 
city tiers. It can also be observed that average expenditure 
on OTT platforms, movies and cable TV. These contribute 
towards entertainment-related shopping is slightly lower 
to more than 75% of all the spending in the entertainment 
for Tier-1 cities compared to that in Tier-2 and metro cities. 
category. The general category contributes to 22% of 
Metro cities offer a plethora of entertainment options from 
the total amount spent on entertainment. This consists 
theatres, concerts, luxury shopping malls, and exclusive 
of expenses on amusement parks, live shows and other 
clubs and lounges, which can lead to higher spending on a 
smaller entertainment segments.
range of activities. Tier-1 cities could have fewer premium 
entertainment options when compared to metro cities, 
The widespread availability of the internet and mobile 
leading to a lower average spending. The expansion of new 
devices in India has contributed to the increased adoption 
entertainment sources such as malls, multiplexes and other 
of OTT platforms and apps across various city tiers. The 
local events in Tier-2 cities could attract more spending 
data also reveals that consumers in metro cities spend 
from their residents who might be eager to explore these 
more on entertainment compared to all other tiered cities. 
new opportunities, leading to increased spending compared 
However, the average number of transactions done by a 
to Tier-1 cities.
Figure 29: Split of total expenditure across different entertainment subcategories
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
General
22%
App stores
31%
Audio
1%
Cable TV
12%
OTT
21%
Movies
13%
App stores
General
OTT
Movies
Cable TV
Audio
32   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 30: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for entertainment-related expenses across 
city tiers
Figure 31: Average amount spent by a person per month 
on entertainment-related expenses across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
1.4
1.44
1.41
1.4
1.37
1.38
1.39
1.4
1.41
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
Average number of transactions
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
531
584
559
597
400
450
500
550
600
650
Amount spent in INR
Insights
High-income earners have the highest percentage of individuals performing transactions 
related to entertainment-related expenses. This might indicate that expenditure in the 
entertainment category could be more of a matter of affordability.
One of the reasons for this could be because people in the lower income groups typically 
share one subscription or one device for entertainment sources like video streaming 
platforms, music streaming services, audio books as well as magazine subscriptions, 
including sports and news. These are generally shared amongst friends and family members 
to save money.
The major spending in this category is observed in the app store expenses category, which 
can be attributed to the rise in the popularity of streaming services, audiobooks, creative 
apps and podcasts. It can also be observed that both the volume and value of transactions 
remain in fairly the same range across different city tiers. One possible explanation for this 
could be that most of the subcategories under entertainment expenses are digital media 
which are accessible to people across all city tiers owing to the increased penetration of 
the internet and smartphones. Additionally, it can be noted that the availability of content 
in regional languages on these entertainment platforms is attracting a wider audience, thus 
contributing to higher spending. 
33   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.2.5 Liquor and spirits
revenue in 2021. It is expected to grow at a CAGR of 6.54% 
between 2023–27 and reach INR 524.8 thousand crore in 
Overview: In India, consumption of liquor and spirits 
five years.33 The rise in consumption of liquor and spirits can 
represents a significant segment within discretionary 
be attributed to factors such as higher disposable income, 
spending, making it the fifth largest contributor to the 
increased access to a wider selection of liquor and spirits 
worldwide spirits market revenues.32 According to a report 
and the growth of the urban population.
by the International Spirits and Wines Association of India 
(ISWAI), the liquor and spirits consumption sector had 
Analysis: The graph below indicates that the percentage 
a market size of INR 429.6 thousand crore in terms of 
of people buying liquor and spirits rises with an increase in 
income level. 
Figure 32: Percentage of people performing transactions for liquor and spirits-related expenses across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
11.81%
12.47%
12.93%
13.63%
13.79%
0.00%
2.00%
4.00%
6.00%
8.00%
10.00%
12.00%
14.00%
% of people transacting
Figure 33: Average amount spent by a person per month on liquor and spirits-related expenses across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
867
1,093
1,723
2,181
2,717
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
Amount spent in INR
32  https://www.iswai.in/wp-content/uploads/2024/06/jan-2024.pdf
33  https://retail.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/food-entertainment/grocery/indian-alcoholic-beverage-industry-may-reach-64-billion-over-the-next-5-
years/104893049
34   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 34: Average number of transactions by a person per month for liquor and spirits-related expenses across 
salary brackets
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
2.63
2.45
2.75
2.74
2.67
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
Average number of transactions
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
While the average amount spent on the consumption of 
Also, for high-income earners, the number of transactions 
liquor and spirits reveals an increasing trend with growth 
is lower as compared to that for mid-level and upper-
in salary, the average number of transactions across salary 
mid-level earners, showing that high-income earners buy 
buckets reveals an interesting contrast. Entry-level earners 
comparatively expensive liquor and spirits as the total 
have a comparatively higher number of transactions than 
money spent is greater when compared to that for people in 
emerging professionals, indicating that they buy a more 
other salary bands.
economical range of liquor and spirits but more frequently. 
Figure 35: Percentage of people performing 
transactions for liquor and spirits-related expenses 
across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
11.88%
10.44%
11.24%
15.25%
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
% of people transacting
Figure 36: Average amount spent by a person per month 
on liquor and spirits-related expenses across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
902
1,161
1,350
1,108
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Amount spent in INR
35   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 37: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for liquor and spirits-related expenses across 
city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
2.23
2.53
2.56
2.86
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Average number of transactions
Insights
Based on the above analysis, it can be observed that the 
average number of transactions for buying liquor and spirits 
is the highest among mid-level earners and people living 
in metro cities. Additionally, the highest expenditure is by 
high-income earners and individuals living in Tier-1 cities. 
This suggests that individuals residing in metros generally 
perform more transactions for buying liquor and spirits but 
opt for more economical varieties of these beverages. The 
increasing awareness of health-related risks associated 
with consuming alcohol may lead to more moderate 
consumption habits or a preference for lower-alcohol 
options which can be more economical. This possibly 
accounts for the reduced expenses, especially in metro 
cities.
Furthermore, the analysis shows that penetration of 
liquor and spirits across different city tiers lies between 
10.44% to 15.25%. This indicates that these beverages 
are bought and consumed by individuals across all city 
tiers, suggesting that variety and quality of beverages 
could be other factors that vary with respect to liquor and 
spirits bought. This could account for the high variation in 
spending on their consumption.
Penetration of liquor and spirits as per city tier follows 
an unusual trend. Metros have a higher average number 
of transactions per person for consumption of liquor and 
spirits as compared to other cities. Further, the average 
number of transactions decreases as we go from metros 
to Tier I to Tier II and beyond. However, the average 
amount spent on these beverages is highest in Tier-1 
cities, followed by Tier-2 cities. This variation in spending 
trends could be due to a variety of reasons, including the 
availability and accessibility of liquor and spirits, their price 
and regulations, and individual preferences for liquor type 
and quality.
36   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.2.6 Travel
salary brackets does not vary significantly. Additionally, 
the total expenditure increases progressively as we move 
Overview: Even though travel is associated with leisure 
from the lowest salary band to the highest salary band. This 
activities, it is also undertaken for non-leisure purposes 
trend can be attributed to travel preferences and the costs 
such as work. Transactions related to cab, train, flight and 
associated with them. For example, high-income earners 
bus fares are included in the analysis for this segment. The 
may opt for more expensive cab services and ride-sharing 
Indian travel market was worth INR 615 thousand crore in 
options, while those with lower income group are more 
FY20, and it is projected to reach INR 1025 thousand crore 
likely to use public transport services such as buses and 
by FY27.34 The revenue of the Indian airline travel market 
trains. Additionally, high-income earners, often prefer to 
alone was estimated at approximately INR 164 thousand 
travel by air if there is airway connectivity as opposed to 
crore in FY20 and is projected to double in size by FY27.35 
taking a train or bus, which can be more time consuming. 
This can be attributed to the growing popularity of travel 
These individuals may also opt for more premium services 
over the years, improving airport infrastructure, increasing 
like business or first class for additional comfort and 
disposable income and easier access to passports.
convenience. In contrast, individuals in lower salary bands 
Analysis: The graph below shows that upper mid-level 
might prioritise measures like travelling via economy class 
earners have the highest number of transactions in this 
to save money.
category. However, the number of transactions across 
Figure 38: Average number of transactions by a person per month for travel-related expenses across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
1.99
1.95
1.91
2.08
2
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
2
2.05
2.1
Average number of transactions
Figure 39: Average amount spent by a person per month on travel-related expenses across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
776
1,200
1,744
2,312
3,066
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Amount spent in INR
34  https://www.ibef.org/industry/tourism-hospitality-india
35  Ibid.
37   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Under modes of travel, train commands the highest share 
whereas air travel remains relatively niche, as train travel is 
of travel expenses, accounting for 48% of all transactions, 
relatively more economical. Nevertheless, the total amount 
while the lowest amount is spent on flight tickets which 
of money spent on train travel is higher than that spent on 
constitute only 13% of expenditures. This can indicate that 
air travel.
a significant portion of the population opts to travel by train, 
Figure 40: Split of total expenditure across different travel subcategories
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Train
48%
Air
13%
Stay
17%
Road
22%
Train
Road
Stay
Air
Insights
It can be observed that the biggest contributor to the travel 
category is train travel, even though air travel is generally 
considered to be more expensive. This indicates that the 
number of individuals who travel by train is much higher 
than that of those who prefer air travel, due to the former’s 
price and accessibility for the Indian populace. Also, the 
number of cities with a railway line or roadway connectivity 
is much larger than those with airports, especially in 
Tier-2 and smaller cities. Hence, it is more convenient for 
travellers to opt for either trains or road transport for point-
to-point travel. This contributes to the difference in the total 
amount of money spent on these modes of transportation.
Another reason for lower total spending on air travel by 
individuals could be that a notable portion of air travel is 
part of business-related trips which are, typically, financed 
by corporations directly. Hence, these payments would 
not have been reflected in the above analysis of travel 
expenses.
Additionally, trends similar to those for food and 
entertainment can be evidenced here. The analysis shows 
that the average number of transactions per month by 
entry-level earners and high-income earners is almost 
equal. However, the average total amount spent by high-
income earners is three times that of entry-level earners. 
This could indicate that high earners opt for more premium 
travel destinations, travel stays and modes of travel. 
Additionally, the growth of digital platforms, including 
travel aggregators, has made travel more accessible and 
convenient, potentially contributing to the overall growth of 
travel transactions.
5.1.2.7	 Others
Apart from the discretionary expenses analysed 
above, 1.17% of these expenses is allocated to 
other expenditures. These can include a variety of 
expenditures that do not necessarily apply to all 
salaried individuals analysed in this report. For tech 
enthusiasts, the latest gadgets and/or subscriptions 
to technology can be a discretionary expense. For 
pet lovers, owning their pet and buying supplies and 
pet care products are other discretionary costs. In 
addition to this, pursuing hobbies and other interests 
often involves discretionary expenses on equipment 
and other materials.
38   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Spending on necessities accounts for 32% of all Indian consumers’ spending, making it one of the primary spending 
categories for Indian households. This includes expenses related to utilities, house rent, medicals, fuel, and everyday 
essentials such as grocery and household expenses. The transactions related to necessity expenditures are shown in the 
chart below:
5.1.3	 Necessity
5.1.3.1	 Utilities
Overview: In Indian households, utility expenses 
largely include costs associated with services such as 
electricity, water, cooking gas (LPG), household waste 
disposal and sewage maintenance. Utilities represent the 
largest expenditure category under necessity spending, 
comprising 30.10% of the total expenses. There has been 
a noticeable increase in these expenses. For example, 
power consumption in India witnessed a year-on-year 
increase of nearly 8% to 1,221.15 billion units (BU) during 
the April–December period of 2023. In comparison, power 
consumption was 1,132.11 BU in April–December 2022.  
Apart from electricity consumption, LPG consumption is 
also on the rise. According to the Industry Consumption 
Review Report released by the Petroleum Planning & 
Analysis Cell (PPAC), India’s consumption of LPG in 
December 2023 increased by 2.3% from that in December 
2022 and by 11.6% from pre-pandemic levels in December 
2019. 
Figure 41: Subcategories under necessity expenditures
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Utilities
30.10%
Everyday essentials
17.48%
House rent
16.04%
Medicals
14.56%
Fuel
10.20%
Others
11.72%
Utilities
Everyday essentials
House rent
Medicals
Fuel
Others
36  https://www.thehindu.com/business/Economy/indias-power-consumption-grows-nearly-8-in-april-december/article67761902.ece
37  https://energy.economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/oil-and-gas/india-records-2-3-rise-in-lpg-consumption-9-2-growth-in-atf-usage-in-december-2023-
report/107276278
39   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Analysis: An analysis of transactions related to utilities reveals that as the salary bracket increases from lowest to highest, 
the number of people transacting for utilities decreases. This trend could be attributed to the tendency of individuals in 
higher-salary brackets to live in societal buildings in higher-tier cities, where utility charges related to water, waste disposal 
and sewage treatment are typically included in the rent or maintenance fees. As a result, these utility expenses may not be 
directly reflected in individual transactions.
Figure 42: Percentage of people performing transactions for utilities-related expenses across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
74%
73%
71%
71%
69%
65%
66%
67%
68%
69%
70%
71%
72%
73%
74%
75%
% of people transacting
Insights
With utilities being the category under necessity expenditure on which Indians 
spend the most, it is clear how essential these services are. It can also be seen 
that across all the salary buckets, the number of people spending on utilities 
is between 69% and 74%, which indicates that these expenditures are equally 
important and consistently paid by all salary groups. Increased urbanisation 
could also be one of the contributors to higher utility consumption, particularly in 
densely populated areas like metros. The growth of remote work across different 
city tiers could also have impacted utility consumption, particularly electricity and 
internet usage.
40   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.3.2	 Everyday essentials
Expenditure related to everyday essentials primarily comprises purchase of necessities such as groceries and household 
items, with grocery shopping accounting for 40% of total expenditures and household items making up for the remaining 
60% of expenses related to everyday essentials. Groceries include items such as vegetables, fruits, grains, dairy products 
and other packaged foods. Household items can encompass a wide variety of goods and services including furnitures and 
fixtures, electronics, domestic supplies and other repair services. This indicates the essential nature of these expenses, as 
the products considered are fundamentals that would be needed for daily living.
5.1.3.2.1  Household
Overview: Expenditure related to the household category encompasses spending on furniture and fixtures, electronics, 
domestic supplies, and various other essentials and services, including repairs. The markets catering to these household 
expenditures are experiencing notable growth. According to the Trade Promotion Council of India (TPCI), the Indian 
furniture market size, calculated by revenue, is expected to grow at a CAGR of 10.9% to reach INR 268.1 thousand crore 
by 2026, from an estimated INR 189.5 thousand crore in 2022.38 A similar trend can be observed for electronic products, as 
their domestic production in India has increased at a CAGR of 13% from INR 401.8 thousand crore in FY17 to INR 828.2 
thousand crore in FY23.39 This growth in market size and manufacturing is likely to be driven by a large increase in demand 
attributable to increasing urbanisation and changing lifestyles. These trends show that expenditure under the household 
category is increasing. The retail landscape channels for buying these items are quite diverse, catering to the budget 
and preferences of customers. They range from retail supermarkets and appliance and furniture stores to e-commerce 
platforms.
Figure 43: Split of total expenditure across subcategories under everyday essentials
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Household
60%
Grocery
40%
Household
Grocery
38  https://www.ibef.org/blogs/the-indian-online-furniture-industry
39  https://www.investindia.gov.in/sector/electronic-systems
41   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Analysis: It is typically assumed that the cost of living in metro and Tier-1 cities exceeds that of Tier-2 or Tier-3 cities, 
and hence their household expenses would be higher. However, the graph below shows that metros spend the least on 
household expenses. One possible reason for the average total money spent on household items being lower in metros is 
that people in metro cities may prefer to pay via credit cards or cash, which this report has not accounted for in its analysis.
The graph shows that household expenses in Tier-1 cities have the highest average total amount spent by an individual per 
month, followed by Tier-2, Tier-3 and then metro cities. 
Analysis of the data reveals that the frequency of household expenses, measured by the number of transactions, is highest 
in metros. For instance, a consumer in a metro city, on average, conducts about 23 household expense transactions per 
year, whereas a consumer in a non-metro city performs approximately 20 transactions per year. Nevertheless, the latter 
pays more for these expenses than metro dwellers
Figure 44: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for household-related expenses across city 
tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
1.82
1.8
1.72
1.94
1.55
1.6
1.65
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
2
Average number 
of transactions
Figure 45: Average amount spent by a person per 
month on household-related expenses across city 
tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
885
968
1,142
859
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Amount spent in INR
Insights
Individuals in Tier-1 cities spend the highest average amount of money per month on household shopping, 
followed by those in Tier-2 and Tier-3 cities. People residing in metro cities have the lowest household 
expenditure. This could be because people in metro cities tend to live in rental homes and have a transient 
lifestyle due to frequent job changes and relocations. Hence, these individuals can choose to spend on 
furniture and electronics as per their convenience and only as much as required by them for a comparatively 
shorter stay, avoiding any heavy investments. Another reason for low household expenses in metro cities could 
be that for rental properties, furniture repairs and plumbing costs are covered within the house rent in the form 
of maintenance charges. While individuals would not have to bear these separate costs, this is also potentially 
contributing to higher house rents in metro cities.
Further, individuals in metros could have better access to a wide variety of domestic household items of higher 
quality compared to those living in lower tiered cities, and a comparatively better spending power to buy these 
higher quality items as well. As a result, individuals in metros may spend less on maintenance and repairs.
It can also be highlighted that the total number of monthly transactions decreases as we move from lower-
tiered to higher-tiered cities (Tier 3 to 1) for transactions related to household items. On the flipside, the value 
of these transactions increases. This could indicate that individuals in higher-tiered cities (Tier 1 specifically) 
either buy more expensive items or buy their household items in bulk.
 While individuals in metros spend the least on average on household items, their transactions are the 
most frequent. Cultural differences such as a transient lifestyle, preference for more convenient and quick 
purchases, and increased access in terms of avenues for purchases (including local stores and online 
shopping) through multiple payment modes could contribute to this trend. The wider variety of shops can also 
lead to more competitive pricing options which can be leveraged by dwellers in metro cities.
42   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.3.2.2  Grocery
Analysis: There is a direct positive correlation between the 
increased spending on groceries and the salary of specific 
Overview: The grocery and food retail market in India is 
individuals. For instance, high-income earners spent 
estimated to grow at a CAGR of 10% between 2022 and 
six times more than entry-level earners on their monthly 
2030.40 It is also expected to reach total revenues of INR 
groceries. Similarly, high-income earners on average made 
69.7 lakh crores by 2025.42 This growth in the grocery 
4.08 grocery-related transactions, which is almost twice that 
market is driven by factors such as the growth in overall 
of entry-level earners, who made 2.38 transactions monthly. 
population in the country, increased adoption of online 
This highlights the preference of high-income earners to 
or e-commerce shopping for grocery items and evolving 
purchase comparatively expensive grocers (and potentially 
models like quick commerce.
better quality ones) more frequently.
Figure 46: Average number of transactions by a person per month for grocery-related expenses across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
2.38
2.54
3.12
3.61
4.08
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
Average number of transactions
40  https://www.investindia.gov.in/sector/retail-e-commerce/food-retail
42   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 47: Average of total money spent by a person per month for grocery-related expenses across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
460
715
1,407
2,110
2,991
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
Amount spent in INR
43   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Insights
As the salaries of individuals increase, their related 
expenses for groceries also increase. This trend can be 
observed both in terms of the value and frequency of 
grocery-related purchases. The reason behind this could 
be that as income increases, people tend to be less price 
sensitive and prefer premium quality groceries, which 
they tend to buy in a higher frequency for ensuring the 
freshness of the items they’ve purchased. On the contrary, 
individuals in the lower salary bracket tend to buy grocery 
items in bulk from nearby supermarkets, e-commerce 
platforms and kirana stores where they can buy them at a 
cheaper price.
Grocery-related expenditures witness an increase as 
we go from a lower salary bracket to a higher one, both, 
in terms of the average amount of money spent and 
the average number of transactions done by a person. 
This may be attributed to people with higher incomes 
preferring to purchase and consume higher-quality and 
premium grocery items while also purchasing them in 
more frequent intervals to get fresher produce and a 
varied diet from convenient, higher-priced stores or online 
platforms, compared to people with a lower income who 
might prefer buying in bulk from supermarkets. Such 
individuals can become less price-sensitive when buying 
groceries and are usually also willing to pay delivery fees 
to online delivery platforms for their groceries, which 
further increases their costs related to groceries.
44   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.3.3	 House rent
Overview: People who relocate to urban cities for employment opportunities or higher education usually reside in rented 
homes.41 House rents, especially in the top metro cities in India, have increased up to 64% in the period between 2019 and 
2024, which has led to increased spending on household rents.42 It accounts for 16.04% of the total necessity expenditures 
of the Indian salaried person. This is a significant percentage since not all salaried employees live in rented homes, hence 
this percentage represents only a portion of such population, unlike other categories which are generally applicable to 
everyone.
Analysis: The average total money spent on house rent by a person is the highest in metro cities, i.e. INR 13,480 per 
month. It is comparatively lower for the other Tier cities. It can also be noted that the average total money spent by 
individuals in Tier 2 (INR 9,860) is slightly higher than the expenditure of individuals in Tier 1 (INR 9,429) cities.
While analysing the total money spent on rent as per the 
salary buckets of individuals, it can be observed that high-
income earners spend almost three times the money that 
entry-level earners do. This shows that as the salary of the 
people increases, they prefer to live in larger houses with 
more amenities which are often located in premium areas. It 
can also be observed that for the first three salary brackets, 
there is no substantial increase in the expenditure towards 
rent. But as we move to the top two bands, a significant 
leap in house rent expenditures can be observed.
Figure 48: Average of total money spent by a person per 
month for house rent-related expenses across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
7,960
9,860
9,429
13,480
0
2,000
4,000
6,000
8,000
10,000
12,000
14,000
16,000
Amount spent in INR
Figure 49: Average of total money spent by a person per month for house rent-related expenses across salary 
brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
6,757
6,534
9,025
14,756
19,927
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
Amount spent in INR
Insights
People living in the highest-tier cities and people with the highest salaries pay the most rent. This can be attributed to 
choices in living standards as per the income level of the people. People with higher incomes have the financial capacity 
to opt for accommodations with more amenities, larger house space and other lifestyle preferences. On the other hand, 
due to financial limitations, individuals with lesser income levels might have to compromise on these factors. There could 
be various reasons for house rent to be higher in Tier 2 cities as compared to Tier 1 cities including, imbalance between 
supply and demand, rapid urbanisation and increased investments into these emerging cities which leads to a rapid influx 
of working professionals in a city.
41  https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chennai/house-rents-go-up-by-10-to-15/articleshow/108666046.cms
42  https://www.business-standard.com/industry/news/rents-in-india-have-increased-by-up-to-64-in-last-five-years-report-124061800368_1.html
45   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.3.4	 Medical expenses
Overview: The medical category encompasses transactions made towards diagnostic labs, pharmacies, doctor 
consultations and hospital expenses. Based on the information from the Centre for Monitoring the Indian Economy’s 
Consumer Pyramids Household Survey (CMIE-CPHS), in November 2022, Indian families spent more than INR 12 thousand 
crore on healthcare-related expenses. During this period, 42.3% of all healthcare-related spending originated in urban 
India, with rural India accounting for the remaining 57.7% of spending.43
Analysis: Consumers in Tier 2 cities spend the most and also have the maximum number of transactions for medical 
expenses. This expenditure decreases as we move up from Tier 2 to metro cities. Metro cities spend the least on medical 
expenses. One potential reason for this could be that people in these cities are more aware and opt for health insurance 
or are provided such benefits by their employers, which reduces their out-of-pocket medical expenses. Additionally, the 
availability of health insurance policies and the capability of people to pay insurance premiums contribute to insurance 
penetration in metro cities.
Figure 50: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for medicals-related expenses across city 
tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
1.5
1.56
1.5
1.48
1.42
1.44
1.46
1.48
1.5
1.52
1.54
1.56
1.58
Average number of transactions
Figure 51: Average of total money spent by a person per 
month for medicals-related expenses across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
2,350
2,450
2,422
2,048
1,800
1,900
2,000
2,100
2,200
2,300
2,400
2,500
Amount spent in INR
Insights
A common trend which can be observed across all city tiers is that the average expenditure on 
healthcare remains in the range of INR 2,048 to INR 2,450 per person, which indicates that the difference 
in healthcare expenditure does not vary significantly across cities. This suggests that healthcare is 
potentially being seen as an essential expenditure by people across India and indicates a growing level of 
health consciousness among the population. 
Additionally, people living in Tier 2 cities spend the most amount of money on medical expenses, and 
with the highest frequency. This trend could potentially be attributed to increasing healthcare costs and 
lower health insurance penetration in these areas leading to higher out-of-pocket expenses. 
Additionally, the limited access to quality healthcare facilities in Tier 2 cities and beyond could act as a 
barrier to implementing preventive healthcare 
measures, which can result in higher 
medical expenses due to late 
diagnosis and treatment. 
Furthermore, the nature of 
}labour-intensive professions 
in these areas, such as construction 
and farming, might increase the risk of 
illness, which results in higher 
healthcare expenses.
43  https://thewire.in/health/how-much-do-indian-households-spend-on-healthcare-every-month
45   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
46   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.1.3.5	 Fuel
Overview: According to the data gathered by the Petroleum and Natural Gas Ministry, between 2013-14 and 2023-24, 
the yearly consumption of petrol has increased by 117%, and that of diesel has increased by 31%.44 This increase can be 
attributed to the growing number of vehicles on the road, the return to work from office, and increased travel for leisure and 
domestic purposes. Furthermore, the expansion of the logistics sector and improved infrastructure such as road networks 
in India’s hinterlands has also led to an increase in fuel consumption.
Analysis: The total expenditure and frequency of transactions related to fuel expenses are lowest in metro cities followed 
by Tier 3 cities indicating lesser reliance on private vehicles in these geographies.
5.1.3.6	 Others
Beyond the expenses covered above, there are 2.4% 
of necessity expenses which have been categorised 
as others. This includes various types of necessary 
expenses like education, telecom and others. Expenses 
related to tariff charges for using telecommunication 
services like talk time, messaging and internet services 
have become a necessary expenditure for people today. 
Education is another necessary expense. While primary 
education is necessary and generally salaried people 
provide it for their children, many families also prioritise 
additional education expenses such as after-school 
tutoring or additional classes. The cost of education can 
also vary greatly depending on the city and the individual 
preferences of the people. 
The availability of public transport and travel aggregators in metros and Tier 1 cities makes it more convenient for 
consumers to rely on these options rather than personal vehicles for their transportation needs, thereby reducing the 
necessity to spend on fuel. Additionally, corporate cab services provided to employees in metro cities also leads to the 
reduction in personal fuel costs. Another reason for the lower average spend on fuel in metro cities could be the use of 
credit cards or cash for fuel payments which has not been accounted for in this analysis. Both the total expenditure and the 
number of transactions are the highest for people living in Tier 2 cities.
Figure 52: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for fuel-related expenses across city tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
1.97
2.16
2.1
1.87
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
2
2.05
2.1
2.15
2.2
Average number of transactions
Figure 53: Average of total money spent by a person per 
month for fuel-related expenses across city tiers 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
701
824
793
620
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Amount spent in INR
Insights
Metro cities have the least expenditure on fuel, which 
indicates that people in these regions rely more on hired 
vehicles or public transport for travel. The tendency to stay 
(either in owned or rental places) near their place of work 
reduces the need for frequent long commutes, thereby 
reducing the consumption of fuel. The growing penetration 
of EVs in India can also be one of the reasons for reduced 
fuel consumption. 
In addition to the reduced availability of travel aggregators, 
minimal options for public transport, and increased 
commutes, compared to metros, owning a vehicle in Tier 
1 and Tier 2 cities and beyond can be seen as a prestige 
symbol, which can potentially contribute to their increased 
consumption of fuel. Conversely, for Tier 3 cities, the need 
for private vehicles can be less pronounced due to the 
proximity of places which results in lower fuel expenditures.
44  https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/energy/oil-gas/indias-petrol-
consumption-doubles-in-a-decade/articleshow/109173510.cms?from=mdr
47   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
A rise in financial investments can be observed among 
on 31 May 2024.47 In addition to this, total contribution 
Indians, indicating a growing focus of the people on 
via systematic investment plans (SIPs) has also touched 
securing their financial stability. As per the data received 
an all-time high at INR 21,262 crore, as compared to 
from the National Stock Exchange (NSE), there are eight 
INR 20,904 crore in May, according to the data released 
crore unique investors in India investing their money in 
by the Association of Mutual Funds in India (AMFI).46 
the stock market, as of 2023. These investors represent 
Additionally, the growth of digital platforms has made 
about five crore unique Indian households which accounts 
investing easier and more accessible. India has seen a rise 
for roughly 17% of all Indian households combined.45 This 
in the penetration of demat accounts, with a 32% increase 
trend of increased investments is driven by several factors 
in total accounts from 11.44 crore in FY23 to 15.14 crore 
including a rise in disposable incomes, increased financial 
in FY24.47 Additionally, as of 2023, 17% of the total Indian 
literacy and the availability of diverse investment options. 
households invested in the Indian stock market.48 People 
Uncertain economic climate, marked by fluctuating market 
have been investing in mutual funds and stock markets and 
conditions and inflation has also increased awareness about 
are continuing to invest in traditional methods like buying 
the importance of financial planning. 
jewellery. The analysis indicates that the first two options 
are generally more popular in Tier 1 and 2 while the latter is 
As of 30 June 2024, the total assets under management 
usually a common form of investment in all cities indicating 
(AUMs) of equity mutual funds have reached a total value 
the diverse investment preferences of Indians and their 
of INR 27.68 lakh crore, which was at INR 25.39 lakh crore 
increasing focus on financial planning through investments.
5.2.1  General investments
Overview: According to the data analysed in this report, at least 90% of consumers choose to invest a percentage of their 
monthly income in various investment products. These include investing in mutual funds, equities, fixed deposits, chit 
funds, cryptocurrency, gold investments and other asset classes. There has also been an increase in the penetration of 
demat accounts in India, with the total number of accounts increasing from 10 crores in August 2022 to 15.14 crores as of 
March 2024.49 
A change in the investment patterns of Indian citizens can be observed by the fact that the AUM for mutual funds, 
insurance and retirement savings have grown by a CAGR of 15% over the period of 10 years from 2013 to 2023. Bank 
deposits have also grown at a CAGR of 9% for the same period.50 This shift can be attributed to increasing awareness 
among people and improved accessibility to platforms and services which facilitate investment in mutual funds and the 
stock market. These investments have the potential to yield larger returns than bank savings accounts which have relatively 
low interest rates.
5.2  Investing: Beyond spending
45  https://www.businesstoday.in/markets/stocks/story/17-of-all-indian-households-invest-in-the-indian-stock-markets-says-nse-ceo-403824-2023-10-30
46  https://www.livemint.com/mutual-fund/inflows-into-equity-mutual-funds-rose-17-percent-to-rs-40-608-crore-in-june-amfi-data-11720513906059.html
47  https://www.business-standard.com/markets/news/india-s-demat-tally-crosses-150-million-mark-for-the-first-time-in-march-124040501034_1.htmlhttps://www.
business-standard.com/markets/news/india-s-demat-tally-crosses-150-million-mark-for-the-first-time-in-march-124040501034_1.html
48  https://www.businesstoday.in/markets/stocks/story/17-of-all-indian-households-invest-in-the-indian-stock-markets-says-nse-ceo-403824-2023-10-
30?onetap=true
49  https://www.business-standard.com/markets/news/india-s-demat-tally-crosses-150-million-mark-for-the-first-time-in-march-124040501034_1.htmlhttps://www.
business-standard.com/markets/news/india-s-demat-tally-crosses-150-million-mark-for-the-first-time-in-march-124040501034_1.html
50 https://www.business-standard.com/economy/news/financialisation-of-household-savings-can-fund-private-capex-goldman-sachs-124052201203_1.html
48   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Analysis: There is an inverse correlation between investment and salary growth as evident from Figure 55. Expenditure 
towards investment, which is calculated based on the average amount invested to the ratio of their salary, is highest at 
23% in the lowest income bracket and reduces to 11% in the highest income bracket.
In absolute terms, at least 90% of consumers in every salary band invests. However, as stated earlier, as of 2023, there 
are eight crore stock market investors in India,  which is approximately 5.55% of the Indian population. Additionally, 
as of March 2024, there are 15.14 crore demat accounts in India,  against the total Indian population of 144 crores.  
These numbers show that the total number of investors in India is much lower than 90%. Hence, the above figures are 
representative of a small segment of the Indian population which comprises tech-savvy borrowers who primarily apply for 
loans through FinTech and NBFCs using digital platforms.
Figure 54: Average of money invested to salary ratio
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
23%
17%
13%
11%
11%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
Average of median ratio
Figure 55: Percentage of people investing across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
93%
94%
95%
95%
91%
89%
90%
91%
92%
93%
94%
95%
96%
% of people investing
51  https://www.businesstoday.in/markets/stocks/story/17-of-all-indian-households-invest-in-the-indian-stock-markets-says-nse-ceo-403824-2023-10-30
52  https://www.business-standard.com/markets/news/india-s-demat-tally-crosses-150-million-mark-for-the-first-time-in-march-124040501034_1.htmlhttps://www.
business-standard.com/markets/news/india-s-demat-tally-crosses-150-million-mark-for-the-first-time-in-march-124040501034_1.html
53  https://www.businessinsider.in/india/news/indias-population-reaches-144-crore-to-double-in-77-years-unfpa-report/articleshow/109365889.cms
49   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
A majority of this investment, around 64% is allocated towards general investments, which includes investments done 
on platforms or applications for which the specific type of investment could not be identified precisely. This is followed 
by mutual funds, where individuals allocate 22% of the total amount invested, after which an additional 11% is directed 
towards direct equity investment in the capital markets.
While the absolute value of investments notably increases with higher salary brackets, the investment as a percentage of 
total salary tends to decrease as salary increases. This trend holds true across various types of investments. For instance, 
in the case of gold, although the monthly investment in gold increases significantly from INR 600 to INR 1,500 as the salary 
bracket increases, the investment as a percentage of the total salary decreases.
Figure 56: Total amount invested in different subcategory
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Shares
11%
Recurring deposit
1.30%
Fixed deposit
0.70%
Small saving
0.50%
Gold
0.22%
Chit funds
0.18%
Crypto transaction
0.1%
General investments
Mutual funds
Shares
Recurring deposit
Fixed deposit
Small savings
Gold
Chit funds
Crypto transaction
General investments
64%
Mutual funds
22%
Figure 57: Average number of transactions by a person per month for making investments across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
3.05
3.63
3.4
7.68
3.82
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Average number of transactions
50   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 58: Average of total money spent by a person per month for making investments across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
600
625
830
1,330
1,500
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
Amount spent in INR
Insights
For each salary band, more than 90% of individuals 
invest their money in various instruments, which 
demonstrates a strong interest among individuals in 
India to invest. Interestingly, it can also be noted that 
the percentage of salary invested decreases with an 
increase in salary, indicating that people tend to invest 
a certain amount rather than incrementally even with 
higher earnings. However, it is important to note that a 
lower investment percentage at a higher salary bracket 
typically exceeds a higher investment percentage at a 
lower salary bracket.
For upper-mid-level earners, the average number of 
investment-related transactions is comparatively more 
for individuals in other salary brackets. It might indicate 
that these individuals are investing in certain types of 
schemes which requires them to make more frequent 
transactions. It could also mean that they prefer to 
have a more diversified portfolio for their investments, 
leading to different transactions for different schemes 
and increasing the overall frequency. Additionally, the 
increasing accessibility of asset classes like alternative 
investments and virtual digital assets to mass affluents 
further supports this trend.
51   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
5.2.2  Investment in jewellery
Overview: When it comes to investing in jewellery, investing in gold is the most preferred option for Indians since it is 
considered to be a prominent form of investment for cultural reasons. It is estimated that Indian households hold up to 
27,000 tonnes of gold.54 Another popular choice for investment in jewellery in India is silver. This section will focus on the 
trends in investments related to jewellery in general.
Analysis: While the frequency of jewellery expenditure remained comparable across geographical locations, Tier 2 cities 
emerged as the top spenders. On average, individuals in Tier 2 cities spent approximately 10% more on jewellery than 
those in metros and 50% more than those in Tier 1 cities. This indicates a greater inclination among consumers in Tier 2 
cities to invest in jewellery compared to other geographical regions.
Figure 59: Average number of transactions by a person 
per month for making jewellery investments across city 
tiers
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
1.35
1.41
1.31
1.38
1.29
1.31
1.33
1.35
1.37
1.39
1.41
1.43
Average number of transactions
Figure 60: Average of total money spent by a person 
per month for making jewellery investments distributed 
geographically
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
3,454
4,109
2,632
3,790
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
4,500
Tier 3
Tier 2
Tier 1
Metro
Amount spent in INR
Insights
People living in Tier 2 cities spend the maximum 
amount of money and with the highest frequency 
towards jewellery shopping. This could indicate 
that buying jewellery is one of the most popular 
modes of investment for people living in Tier 2 
cities. Additionally, it could also reflect a lack of 
awareness and accessibility of other asset classes 
in Tier 2 cities and beyond. As a consequence, 
gold businesses are likely to be in higher demand 
in these cities. The findings also indicate that 
individuals in other city Tiers are likely to have a 
more diversified investment portfolio than those 
living in Tier 2 cities.
54  https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/cons-products/fashion-/-cosmetics-/-jewellery/golds-soaring-prices-offer-investment-potential-for-indians-with-
household-reserves-now-a-lu crative-asset/articleshow/109464382.cms?from=mdr
51   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
52   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
06
How Indians are spending money
After identifying the where and why of Indian spending behaviour, the next main focus area is how Indians spend money. 
This section explores the popular modes of transactions used for specific kinds of expenditures. 
6.1  Transaction sources
Credit cards are used for both discretionary spending and basic lifestyle necessities. Considering that 83% of discretionary 
spending was allocated towards paying credit card bills by individuals who own a credit card, it is evident that the 
preference for using credit cards as one of the primary modes of transaction is common, especially for non-necessary and 
obligatory transactions.
6.1.1  Credit card
As per the data from the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), credit cards use in India has increased notably over the past year. In 
April 2024, India had over 10.25 crore credit cards55 up 25% from 8.6 crore credit cards in April 2023.56 The data indicates 
that credit card users increased significantly from 25% in the entry-level earners category to 62% in the high-income earner 
category. This shows that consumers with higher salaries are more likely to own and use a credit card.
Figure 61: Penetration of credit card users across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
25%
41%
51%
58%
62%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
Penetration rate
55  https://www.thehindubusinessline.com/money-and-banking/credit-card-spends-fall-5-in-april-pace-of-new-card-additions-slower/article68218971.ece
56  https://www.forbes.com/sites/zennonkapron/2023/06/22/why-credit-card-adoption-is-rising-in-india/
53   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 62: Average monthly credit card bill payment transactions done by individuals
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
2.3
2.4
2.7
2.7
2.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Average number of transactions
Figure 63: Average total credit card expenses by individuals across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
17,758
22,517
27,440
42,488
58,175
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
Amount spent in INR
Credit cards provide immediate access to cash and can also enable deferral of cash flows. At lower income levels, credit 
cards could majorly be used for the latter. Surprisingly, for many individuals, expenditures on credit cards significantly 
surpassed the total salary of the consumers, particularly for entry-level earners and emerging professionals. 
Also, to understand the various benefits of credit cards like revolving balances and reward programmes, individuals are 
more likely to possess multiple credit cards. This phenomenon is more prevalent among individuals in higher-income 
groups, for whom the credit card issuers are typically able to seamlessly issue new cards based on existing ones. 
54   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 64: Ratio of average credit card expenditure to salary across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
1.65
1.12
0.45
0.78
0.67
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
Ratio
55   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Figure 65: Average monthly cash deposit transactions done by individuals across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.7
1.75
1.8
1.85
1.9
1.95
Average number of transactions
Figure 66: Average of total money deposited by individuals across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
23,175
28,015
39,650
48,715
64,115
0
10,000
20,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
60,000
70,000
Amount deposited in INR
There are two kinds of cash deposits made by the consumers regardless of their salary band. For instance, the entry-level 
earners exhibited the highest number of cash deposit transactions per month despite having the lowest transaction values. 
Additionally, there was a 2.3x increase in the deposited amount as the salary bracket moved from the lowest to the highest.
6.1.2  Cash deposit
56   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Furthermore, the average number of withdrawal transactions by a person per month remains consistent across all salary 
brackets, highlighting the ongoing need for hard cash to manage day-to-day transactions. 
6.1.3  Cash withdrawal
The number of cash withdrawal transactions is comparable across all salary brackets, however, as the salary increases 
from the lowest to the highest band, the total amount withdrawn increases by 2.6x from INR 15,062 per month to INR 
28,803 per month. . This could indicate a greater need for cash among higher-salary earners to manage their increased 
expenses. However, many of these expenses could potentially be paid via UPI and other digital payment methods unless 
cash is the preferred mode of payment or acceptance for certain types of expenses. These expenses may include rent, 
payment for household help, local transportation, medical expenses, festive social obligations, managing unexpected 
expenses or emergencies as a precaution and informal lending.
Figure 67: Average monthly cash withdrawal transactions done by individuals across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
3.8
3.8
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.4
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4
Average number of transactions
Figure 68: Average of total money withdrawn by individuals across salary brackets
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Established 
earners
Mid-level 
professionals
High-income 
earners
15,062
18,105
22,650
24,750
28,803
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
35,000
Amount withdrawn in INR
57   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
6.2  Key mode of transactions
According to data from the National Payments Corporation 
of India (NPCI), in FY23, 83.7 hundred crore transactions 
worth INR 139 lakh crores were conducted through UPI. 
In FY24, the total number of transactions increased to 131 
hundred crores with a total value of INR 200 lakh crores.57 In 
terms of total users, UPI is used by over 30 crore individuals 
and over 5 crore merchants, as of 2023.58 
Most discretionary and necessity-related transactions 
across tiers and salary brackets are done via UPI, followed 
by modes such as cash withdrawals from ATMs, card 
payments at POS terminals and payments made through 
payment gateway. This shows that UPI is the most preferred 
mode of payment for such expenses.
22% of total transactions done through UPI are for 
processing payments for shopping related to both lifestyle 
purchases and everyday essentials combined. This portion 
decreases as we move from categories such as food – 
14%, utilities – 12%, loans – 9%, and gaming-related 
expenses – 9%, however, there is still a strong preference 
for using UPI.
6.2.1  UPI
Figure 69: Percentage Split of Total Transaction Volume Processed Through UPI
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Everyday essentials and lifestyle purchases
Food: Dining out/ ordering in
Utlilities
Loan
Online gaming
Travel
Medicals
Fuel
Credit card payment
Entertainment
22%
14%
12%
9%
9%
6%
6%
4%
4%
3%
3%
2%
2% 1% 1%
2%
57  https://www.livemint.com/news/india/india-recorded-about-131-billion-upi-transactions-in-fy24-says-finance-minister-11714388161809.html
58  https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1973082&ref=indiatech.com#:~:text=Today%2C%20more%20than%2040%25%20of,vendors%20to%20
large%20shopping%20malls.
58   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
When it comes to the percentage of the total amount spent, UPI is mainly used to pay loans (30%) and credit card bills 
(28%). 
6.2.2  POS
RBI data from April 2024 reveals that different merchants 
by the percentage of transactions and the total amount 
across the nation were using about 8.8 million POS 
spent for shopping via POS.
terminals,59 indicating the popularity of POS as a mode 
Transactions conducted for everyday essentials and lifestyle 
of transaction. POS-based payments primarily comprise 
purchases are significant categories of payment made by 
transactions made using debit cards, credit cards and UPI 
POS in terms of the percentage of total transactions done 
through QR using smart POS. POS is predominantly being 
using POS with a 50% contribution to the entire number 
utilised by Indians for both lifestyle purchases and everyday 
of transactions via POS. Transactions for fuel and food are 
essential shopping combined, followed by expenses related 
next in percentage of total transactions with 15% and 13% 
to fuel and dining out/ordering in. The prevalence of using 
contributions, respectively.
POS as a payment method for both can be observed both 
Figure 70: Percentage split of total transaction value processed through UPI
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Loan
Credit card payment
Everyday essentials and lifestyle purchases
Investment
Utilities
Business expense
Food: Dining out/ ordering in
Gaming
Travel
Reversed transactions
30%
28%
13%
11%
7%
2%
2% 2% 2%2% 1%
Figure 71: Percentage split of total transaction volume processed through POS devices
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Everyday essentials and lifestyle purchases
Fuel
Food: Dining out/ ordering in
Liquor and spirits
Entertainment
Travel
Medical shop
Vehicle
Loan
Utilities
Others
50%
15%
13%
4%
3%
3%
3%
3%
2%
1%
3%
59  https://rbi.org.in/scripts/ATMView.aspx?atmid=158
59   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Similar to the percentage of total transactions, the percentage of total money spent via POS as a mode of payment is 
highest combined for lifestyle purchases and everyday essentials spends, which accounts for 60% of the total money 
spent. This is followed by loan payments at 8% and jewellery at 6%.
Figure 72: Percentage split of total transaction value processed through POS devices
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Everyday essentials and lifestyle purchases
Loan
Jewellery
Fuel
Food: Dining out/ ordering in
Travel
Credit card payment
Hospital expenses
Utilities
Vehicle
Medical shop
Business expenses
Liquor and spirits
Others
60%
8%
6%
5%
4%
3%
3%
2%
2%
2%
1% 1% 1% 2%
60   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
In India, the payment gateway market size, as measured by total revenue, reached INR 11.9 thousand crores in 2022 and 
is expected to reach INR 23.7 thousand crores by 2028, growing at a CAGR of 11.6% during the forecast period of 2023 to 
2028.60 Payment gateways are majorly used for transactions related to dining out or ordering in when analysed as per the 
percentage of total transactions. However, the total percentage of total spending done via payment gateways is highest for 
credit card and loan payments.
6.2.3  Payment gateway
Figure 73: Percentage split of total transaction volume processed through payment gateways
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Food: Dining out/ordering in
Utilities
Loan
Credit card payment
Everyday essentials and lifestyle purchases
Travel
Entertainment
Investment
Online gaming
29%
19%
13%
11%
10%
8%
3%
2% 2%
3%
Figure 74: Percentage of total transaction value processed through payment gateways
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Credit card payment
43%
Loan
29%
Investment
9%
Everyday 
essentials and 
lifestyle purchases
6%
Utilities
5%
Food: Dining out/
ordering in, 3%
Travel, 1%
Others
4%
Credit card payment
Loan
Investment
Everyday essentials and lifestyle purchases
Utilities
Food: Dining out/ordering in
Travel
Others
60  https://bfsi.economictimes.indiatimes.com/blog/what-do-businesses-want-from-their-payment-gateway/104965487
61   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
6.3  Mode of payment
This section discusses the various modes of payment used for expenditures related to obligatory spending and all sub-
categories of discretionary and necessity spending. The section does not include transactions done with cash or credit 
cards since bank statements cannot show where withdrawn cash and credit cards were utilised. As a result, it provides no 
information about where the money was spent.
6.3.1  Obligatory spending
For obligatory expenses, the electronic clearing service 
handling obligatory payments accounting for 10% and 15% 
(ECS) mode processes the largest percentage of total 
of the total value of transactions, respectively. 
spending at 35% followed by UPI at 25%. Despite ECS 
Consumer preference can play an important role in the 
having a higher share in terms of the value of transactions 
choice of payment modes for obligatory payments. Because 
processed, UPI transactions happen more frequently 
of its convenience and security, ECS is the preferred 
accounting for 38% of all transactions by volume. 
method for high-value, recurring transactions that can be 
Additionally, payment gateways and standing instructions 
automated. Conversely, UPI is preferred for frequent low-
can also be observed as popular modes of transaction for 
value transactions due to its speed and ease of use.
Figure 75: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for loan repayments
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
ECS
UPI
PG
SI
Others
ECS
35%
Others
15%
SI
15%
PG
10%
UPI
25%
Figure 76: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for loan repayments
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
ECS
PG
SI
Others
UPI
38%
SI
13%
PG
9%
ECS
30%
Others
10%
62   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
6.3.2  Discretionary spending
Lifestyle purchases – general
Figure 77: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for general lifestyle purchases
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
PG
IMPS
Others
UPI
85%
Others
2%
IMPS, 1%
POS
8%
PG, 4%
Figure 78: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for general lifestyle purchases
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
86%
PG, 4%
UPI
POS
PG
IMPS
Others
Others
5%
IMPS, 1%
POS
4%
Lifestyle purchases – general
63   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Lifestyle purchases – fashion
Figure 79: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for fashion lifestyle purchases
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
Others
PG
CGQ
IMPS
UPI
65%
CHQ, 3%
POS
22%
PG
4%
Others
5%
IMPS
1%
Figure 80: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for fashion lifestyle purchases
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
PG
UPI
78%
POS
12%
PG, 10%
64   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Lifestyle purchases – personal care
Figure 81: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for personal care-related lifestyle 
purchases
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
Others
Others
1%
UPI
86%
PG
7%
POS, 6%
Figure 82: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for personal care-related lifestyle 
purchases
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
Others
Others
1%
UPI
91%
PG
6%
POS, 2%
65   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Online gaming
Figure 83: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for online gaming-related 
expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
PG
Cheque
Others
Cheque, 1%
Others
2%
UPI
67%
PG
10%
POS
20%
Figure 84: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for online gaming-related 
expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
PG
IMPS
Others
IMPS, 2%
Others
3%
UPI
82%
PG, 6%
POS, 7%
66   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Food: dining out/ordering in
Figure 85: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for food-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
Others
1%
UPI
59%
PG
31%
POS
9%
UPI
PG
POS
Others
Figure 86: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for food-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
Others
Others
4%
UPI
75%
PG
14%
POS
7%
67   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Entertainment
Figure 87: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for entertainment-related 
expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
SI
Others
SI, 2%
Others
2%
UPI
76%
POS
6%
PG
14%
Figure 88: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for entertainment-related 
expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
SI
Others
Others
3%
UPI
76%
SI, 3%
POS
5%
PG
14%
68   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Liquor and spirits
Figure 89: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for liquor and spirits-related 
expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
Others
Others
2%
UPI
81%
POS
17%
Figure 90: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for liquor and spirits-related 
expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
Others
Others
2%
UPI
98%
69   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Travel
Figure 91: Percentage of total ae mount spent through different modes of payments for travel-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
IMPS
IMPS
1%
UPI
68%
POS
9%
PG
22%
Figure 92: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for travel-related expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
IMPS
IMPS
1%
UPI
68%
POS
3%
PG
20%
70   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
For all types of discretionary spending, both in terms of the percentage of 
amount spent and the number of transactions, the most popular payment mode 
is UPI. The percentage of the total amount spent through UPI lies between 59% 
(food: dining out/ordering in) and 86% (lifestyle purchases related to personal 
care) of the total amount spent for discretionary expenditures. The percentage of 
transactions lies between 75% (food: dining out/ordering in and entertainment) 
and 98% (liquor and spirits) of all transactions done for discretionary expenses. 
This shows that the ease of use and cost-effectiveness of UPI has increased 
its adoption throughout India and made it the first choice for people for such 
expenditures. However, within discretionary expenditure, UPI is least preferred 
for transactions related to dining in or ordering out. Instead, it is most popular for 
expenses related to the consumption of liquor and spirits and lifestyle purchases 
for general and personal care products or services. This could be due to the 
fact that dining in or ordering out often has other options for making payments 
such as payment gateways on online websites and POS devices which might be 
preferred due to the discounts and reward points offered through these modes. 
However, for buying liquor and spirits and purchasing general and personal care 
products or services, offline shopping is more prevalent, making UPI a more 
convenient mode of payment. This trend can also be attributed to the wider 
acceptance of UPI by smaller merchants due to minimal merchant discount 
rates (MDR)61 and the hardware costs associated with it. 
When analysed by the percentage of the total amount spent, POS is the second 
most popular mode of transaction for expenses related to lifestyle purchases 
(general and fashion), online gaming, and buying liquor and spirits. Additionally, 
PGs are preferred for expenses related to personal care lifestyle purchases, 
food, entertainment and travel. This can be attributed to the general tendency to 
buy the first set of items more frequently at physical outlets like supermarkets, 
shops, and liquor and spirits stores which typically have POS machines. For the 
latter categories, online payments are more common as these transactions are 
more frequently made on their respective websites.
When analysed through the percentage of transactions done via different 
payment modes, the second most popular mode of transaction for expenses 
related to general lifestyle purchases, dining out or ordering in, travel and 
entertainment expenses is PG. Additionally, POS is the preferred mode of 
transaction for expenses related to online gaming and lifestyle purchases for 
fashion and personal care items.
61  https://inc42.com/buzz/amazon-pay-india-ceo-bats-for-mdr-regime-for-upi-payments/
70   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
71   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
6.3.3  Necessity spending
Utilities
Figure 93: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for utilities-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
POS
Others
Others
7%
UPI
70%
POS
2%
PG
21%
Figure 94: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for utilities-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
PG
Others
Others
4%
UPI
70%
PG
20%
72   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Everyday essentials – household
Figure 95: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for household-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
POS
PG
PG
1%
UPI
80%
POS
19%
Figure 96: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for household-related expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
87%
UPI
POS
PG
PG
3%
POS
10%
73   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Everyday essentials – grocery
Figure 97: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for grocery-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
PG
13%
POS, 5%
UPI
81%
UPI
PG
POS
IMPS
IMPS
1%
Figure 98: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for grocery-related expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
PG
12%
POS, 2%
UPI
85%
UPI
PG
POS
IMPS
IMPS
1%
This term has been used as the data collected belongs to users who applied for digital loans. Hence, we are referring to 
them as tech-savvy consumers.
74   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
House rent
Figure 99: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for house rent-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
IB, 4%
PG, 6%
UPI
49%
IMPS
40%
UPI
IMPS
PG
IB
NEFT
IMPS
1%
Figure 100: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for house rent-related expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
PG, 4%
NEFT, 8%
UPI
49%
IMPS
26%
UPI
IMPS
NEFT
PG
IB
IB
2%
75   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Medical expenses
Figure 101: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for medicals-related expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
IMPS, 2%
UPI
80%
POS
16%
UPI
POS
IMPS
Others
Others
2%
Figure 102: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for medicals-related expenses 
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
92%
POS
5%
IMPS, 1%
UPI
POS
IMPS
Others
Others
2%
76   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Fuel
Figure 103: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for fuel-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
73%
POS
26%
UPI
POS
PG
PG
1%
Figure 104: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for fuel-related expenses
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
78%
POS
17%
UPI
POS
Others
Others
5%
Similar to discretionary spending, UPI is the most favoured mode of payment for necessity expenditure as well. It accounts 
for the highest percentage of spending across all categories, ranging from 49% for house rent to 81% for grocery 
shopping. UPI also leads in the volume of transactions across all categories ranging from 60% for house rent to 92% for 
medical expenses.
The second most preferred mode of payment for necessity expenditure by both the total percentage of spending and the 
total volume of transactions varies for each expense category: POS is commonly used for household expenses, medicals 
and fuel; PG is more frequently used for utilities and grocery shopping and IMPS is a popular choice for paying house rent. 
UPI has a greater prevalence amongst all the methods used for necessity spending, except for house rent. Even though 
UPI is still the most preferred mode of transaction for paying rent with 49% of total spending being done through this 
mode, IMPS is closely behind at 40%, indicating that electronic fund transfer is a popular mode for paying rent. The 
number of transactions made for this category follows a similar trend, with UPI accounting for the highest percentage of 
transactions at 60%, followed by IMPS at 26%.
77   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
6.3.4  Investment in jewellery
From a preferred mode of payment perspective, UPI is still the most preferred mode of payment as it is used for 63% 
of transactions by value and 83% of transactions by volume. Following UPI, POS systems are used for 33% of total 
payments by value and 13% by volume. Card-based payments, especially for high ticket transactions, are gaining traction 
across various geographical regions, despite the emergence of UPI and the continued existence of other formats such as 
cheques, DD and NEFT for jewellery shopping.
Figure 105: Percentage of total amount spent through different modes of payments for jewellery investments
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
POS, 1%
PG
33%
UPI
63%
UPI
POS
PG
Others
Others
3%
Figure 106: Percentage of total transactions through different modes of payments for jewellery investments
Note: This graph is based on the analysis of available data.
UPI
83%
PG, 2%
POS
13%
UPI
POS
PG
Others
Others
2%
78   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
07
Key takeaways
The analysis presented in this report provides a comprehensive understanding of the spending behaviour of tech-savvy 
Indian consumers, highlighting the multifaceted drivers and patterns of their expenditures. To capitalise on these insights, 
given below are a few areas where BFSI stakeholders can consider enhancing their value propositions to encourage the 
consumption of FS products and services.
7.1  Improving access to credit
7.2  Inclusive financial planning
I.  Tailored loan products: Banks and loan providers can 
customise loan offerings to meet customer needs, attract 
a wider client base and boost financial inclusion. A few 
considerations for the same are:
a.  For entry-level earners and emerging professionals, 
FIs can offer loans with flexible EMIs, and an option 
for shorter repayment terms. Salary-advance loans 
can also attract borrowers who might otherwise turn 
to informal credit sources.
b.  Banks, FIs and FinTechs can partner with the 
employers of upper-mid-level and high-income 
earners to better assess repayment capacity. This 
can enable them to offer curated credit options such 
as elevated credit limits, flexible repayment, top-up 
loans, financial advisory services, and options for a 
rate lock. 
c.  FIs and FinTechs can offer tenants rent advance loans 
and incentivise them through cashback and loyalty 
programmes to make their payments through specific 
channels. For lower-income groups, including blue-
collar workers, FIs can offer options to split rent into 
smaller but more manageable fortnightly or monthly 
instalments. 
II.  BNPL: Banks and FinTechs can provide BNPL options 
to cater to the needs of entry-level earners, emerging 
professionals and residents of Tier 2 and lower-tiered 
cities. BNPL can help transition individuals from the 
informal to the formal credit market.
III.  EV financing: The growth of the EV sector in India is 
led by Tier 2 and Tier 3 cities,62 where fuel expenditure 
is notably higher. FIs can provide financing options 
including competitive interest rates, reduced initial 
down payments and flexible payment options for 
buying EVs. 
I.  PFM apps: PFM apps can help users track their income, 
expenses, loans and savings. Using aggregated data, 
these apps can offer insights into spending patterns, set 
budgeting limits, offer financial advice on investments 
and asset management, and suggest ways to optimise 
loan payments and consolidate debts.
II.  Bill payment systems: FIs can enhance the solutions 
provided by bill payment systems (e.g. BBPS offers a 
system for managing recurring expenses like utility bills, 
and loan EMIs, by consolidating payments into a single 
platform) by integrating features like automatic payment 
reminders to help customers avoid late fees. 
III.  Wealth management platforms: FIs can offer 
alternative investment options including private debt, 
startup equity, corporate bonds, asset leasing and other 
fixed-income alternatives such as invoice discounting, 
revenue-based financing and asset leasing. 
62  https://auto.hindustantimes.com/auto/electric-vehicles/electric-vehicles-go-local-tier-2-and-3-cities-fuel-indias-ev-growth-41720021284884.html
79   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
7.2  Partnerships and value-added services for better customer engagement
I.  Loyalty and reward programmes: Banks and 
credit card companies can leverage the growing 
trend of providing discounts or cashback benefits to 
their customers by tailoring their loyalty and reward 
programmes and aligning them to the customer’s 
spending habits. Based on the data analysed in the 
‘Discretionary’ and ‘Necessity’ spending sections, the 
following strategies can help banks and other FIs to 
enhance customer engagement and drive transactions:
a.  Focus on high-transaction categories: FIs can offer 
discounts, cashback benefits and reward points for 
purchases in high transaction volume categories using 
the bank’s products such as credit cards and payment 
platforms. Additional incentives can also be offered for 
larger shopping cart sizes or higher order values.
b.  Business partnerships: Potential business partnerships 
which banks and other FIs can target include online 
gaming companies, e-commerce websites and large 
retail chains.
c.  Tiered cashback programmes: Through tiered 
cashback programmes for targeted categories, where 
customers can earn higher cashback or discounts as 
their spending increases, banks and FIs can encourage 
customers to further their spending and increase 
customer loyalty.
II.  Payment gateways and POS: PGs and POS are used 
for all processing payments across various categories for 
both ‘Discretionary’ and ‘Necessity’ expenses. FIs can 
drive increased transaction volumes through strategic 
partnerships with different companies. 
a.  PG for in-app purchases and food aggregator apps: 
FIs can focus on partnering with game developers and 
food aggregators to integrate payment gateways into 
the apps and provide discounts to customers who 
pay through them, thereby encouraging users to make 
in-app purchases, capturing a higher volume of these 
transactions and increasing their revenue.
b.  POS solutions for restaurant and retail chains: FIs 
can offer customised POS machine solutions tailored to 
restaurant and retail chains with value-added services 
including inventory management, invoice management 
and features to manage loyalty and reward points.
III.  Partnership with the healthcare ecosystem: FIs 
are increasingly positioning themselves within a wider 
network of partners in various ecosystems to expand 
their product propositions to new bank customers, 
increase engagement with customers and cross-sell 
or up-sell FS products to customers. Through these 
partnerships banks can help in processing transaction 
flows between various stakeholders of the healthcare 
ecosystem.
a.  Healthcare financing: FIs can offer credit products 
to patients to cover costs for expensive medical 
procedures, long-term treatments, payment of premiums 
for insurance products and other flexible payment plans 
to help them manage their medical bills over a period, 
thereby reducing the immediate financial burden. 
b.  Managing payments through wallets and health 
cards: FIs can integrate with insurance providers to 
facilitate direct payment from digital wallets or health 
cards to insurance providers, thereby streamlining the 
overall claims process.
c.  Integrated care: Integrated healthcare models which 
connect patients with a range of specialists, services and 
preventive measures are gaining traction. FIs can provide 
low-cost insurance-related services in partnership with 
healthcare providers which can empower patients to 
enjoy more healthcare benefits at lower costs. 
The tables below illustrate the relevance of some of 
the inputs for the customer segments categorised by 
geography and income levels.
Harvey balls legend
Most 
relevant
Least 
relevant
80   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
Categories for key takeaways
Entry-level 
earners
Emerging 
professionals
Mid-level 
earners  
Upper mid-
level earners 
High-income 
earners
Improving 
access to credit
Tailored loan 
products – flexible 
EMI options with 
lower interest rates
Tailored loan 
products – 
Employer 
partnerships for 
curated credit 
offerings
Tailored loan 
products – splitting 
rent payments and 
providing loans for 
rent advances
BNPL
EV financing
Inclusive 
financial 
planning
Financial planning 
apps and platforms
Partnerships 
and value-
added services 
for better 
customer 
engagement
Loyalty and reward 
programmes
Payment gateways 
and POS
Partnership 
with healthcare 
ecosystem – credit 
products
Partnership 
with healthcare 
ecosystem – 
insurance products
Figure 107: Relevance of key takeaways distributed salary-wise 
Note: PwC analysis
81   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
About Perfios
Categories for key takeaways
Tier 3 cities
Tier 2 cities
Tier 1 cities
  
Metro cities
Improving 
access to credit
Tailored loan 
products – flexible 
EMI options with 
lower interest rates
Tailored loan 
products – 
Employer 
partnerships for 
curated credit 
offerings
Tailored loan 
products – splitting 
rent payments and 
providing loans for 
rent advances
BNPL
EV financing
Inclusive 
financial 
planning
Financial planning 
apps and platforms
Partnerships 
and value-
added services 
for better 
customer 
engagement
Loyalty and reward 
programmes
Payment gateways 
and POS
Partnership 
with healthcare 
ecosystem – credit 
products
Partnership 
with healthcare 
ecosystem – 
insurance products
Note: PwC analysis
Figure 108: Relevance of key takeaways distributed city-wise  
The report underscores the evolving nature of Indian consumer behaviour, driven by a complex interplay of economic, 
psychological, social and technological factors. FIs which remain adaptable and responsive to these evolving trends can 
leverage data-driven insights to effectively meet the needs of tech-savvy Indian consumers. The insights provided herein 
can serve as a vital resource for stakeholders in the BFSI space and guide them towards engaging meaningfully with 
customers. 
82   PwC   |   How India spends: A deep dive into consumer spending behaviour
About Perfios
Founded in 2008, Perfios is a global B2B SaaS FinTech serving the BFSI industry and beyond, in 18 countries, 
empowering 1000+ financial institutions. Through its pioneering software platforms and products, Perfios helps 
financial institutions take big leaps by shaping their origination, onboarding, decisioning, underwriting, and monitoring 
processes at scale and speed. Perfios delivers AI-led data Insights to financial institutions every year to facilitate 
faster decisioning, significantly accelerating access to credit and financial services for the end customer.
Headquartered in Bangalore, Perfios operates globally with 75+ products, platforms and over 500 APIs. In Perfios, its 
clients have a confident and a robust start-to-end tech platform.
Perfios products for every step of the customer lifecycle
Insights
Digitise and analyse documents to automate credit underwriting
OneClick onboarding
Onboard businesses and MSMEs with one click.
TrustArmour
Sophisticated defence against identity fraud using AI and behaviour analysis.
PFM
Intelligent analysis to get a 360° view of the customer’s financial profile.
PCG
Connect lenders with marketplaces and digital platforms for an effortless lending experience.
TKYC
Digital onboarding verification and authentication API Suite
Contact us
Amit Gupta 
Sandesh Jayarama 
Head of Marketing, Perfios 
Head of Strategy & New Business, Perfios 
amit.gupta@perfios.com
sandesh.j@perfios.com
Contributors
Rachit Mathur
Abhishek Dixit
Vigil Viswanathan
Aishwarya Suresh
Shridhar Dave
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve 
important problems. We’re a network of firms in 151 
countries with over 360,000 people who are committed to 
delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax services. 
Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us 
at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its 
member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity. 
Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2024 PwC. All rights reserved.
Contact us
Vivek Belgavi 
Partner, Financial Services Technology Consulting and India 
FinTech Leader 
PwC India 
Email: vivek.belgavi@pwc.com
Mihir Gandhi 
Partner and Leader, Payments Transformation  
PwC India  
Email: mihir.gandhi@pwc.com 
Raghav Aggarwal 
Associate Director, FinTech and Innovation Strategy  
PwC India  
Email: raghav.aggarwal@pwc.com
Contributors
Nikita Chawda
Vignesh Venkataraman
Editor
Design
Dion D’Souza 
Shipra Gupta
Rubina Malhotra
pwc.in
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or  
CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which is a 
separate legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed 
by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. 
Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. 
Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are 
entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this 
publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2024 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved.
SG/September 2024-M&C 39956
