TM
March 2025
Financial health: 
Transcending from 
access to impact
Foreword by ASSOCHAM
In the recent years, India has witnessed significant change in financial inclusion, due to the introduction and 
widespread adoption of initiatives such as Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan Yojana (PMJDY) and Jan-Dhan, Aadhaar and 
Mobile (JAM) Trinity for increased access to formal banking services, Aadhaar for biometric identification and digital 
direct benefit transfers. It is important to note that financial inclusivity should not only focus on poverty reduction 
but also empower individuals to stabilise their future and effectively prepare for any financial risks. The end objective 
of financial inclusion should always be to drive sustainable prosperity and economic growth.
A large number of retail investors in India are increasingly diversifying into equities, mutual funds and alternative 
assets such as real estate investment trusts (REITs), gold exchange traded funds (ETFs) and alternate investment 
funds (AIFs). This evolution of India’s capital market has resulted in enhanced market liquidity and helped bring 
down the reliance of retail investors on traditional savings instruments such as gold and real estate.
New-age FinTech companies in India have also been playing a crucial role in expanding the access to financial 
services through digital wallets and other innovative payment solutions. By providing such customised products for 
certain target groups, these companies are helping in closing some key gaps in our financial ecosystem.
The Government’s role in driving access to financial services cannot be discounted. In addition to the current 
initiatives, facilitating the best-fit funding for small businesses and driving impactful financial inclusion schemes 
would drive further economic welfare.
With this background, ASSOCHAM is proud to host the 3rd National Conclave on Financial Inclusion with the theme 
‘Reforming today for a fairer tomorrow’. In partnership with PwC, we have drafted a detailed report outlining India’s 
financial inclusion journey and how we see the future unfolding.
We hope this report would be of value to regulators, market participants, researchers and policymakers in their 
continuous endeavour to advance financial inclusion and financial health in India. I extend my sincere appreciation 
to our knowledge partner for their invaluable contributions and wish all participants a successful and enriching 
conclave.
Manish Singhal
Secretary General 
ASSOCHAM
2    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
Achieving financial inclusion needs to be seen as much more than mere access to formal banking services. 
The focus now needs to be on financial health. This report highlights the evolution of financial inclusion in India 
through various impactful initiatives and addressing the lingering challenges such as income volatility and poor risk 
management.
Financial health is the intended outcome and impact of financial inclusion. Income stability, debt management 
and savings are pertinent factors to be considered in order to evaluate financial health. Access to formal financial 
services is often seen as an indicator of financial inclusion but it is important to understand the relevance of how 
this access is being used and creating an impact.
The Financial Health Survey, co-developed by PwC and Dvara Research Foundation, is a diagnostic tool intended to 
capture multiple metrics across access, usage and impact to help generate valuable insights for financial institutions 
to drive financial wellbeing among individuals. This tool considers socio-demographic features and financial 
practices in order to offer a holistic view of financial health. It is built with the key understanding that financial 
health depends not only on inclusion but also on occupation, wealth and financial awareness. This tool will help 
financial service providers to better understand their customer segments, in terms of their unique requirements and 
expectations.
In this paper, we focus on transitioning from transactional to personalised, data-driven solutions using behavioural 
insights and analytics, especially for those who are new to financial services. It also covers India’s evolving capital 
market, noting a shift from traditional savings to higher-yielding instruments driven by consumer awareness 
and preference for market-linked investments. This approach aims to improve customer retention, enhance 
portfolio resilience and support sustainable growth, by translating financial inclusion into tangible financial health 
improvements.
We hope you find this report to be insightful.
Foreword by PwC
Vivek Patil
Partner, Financial Services 
PwC India
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   3
Foreword by Dvara Research
India finds itself at an interesting crossroads in its financial inclusion journey. On the one hand, access to basic bank 
accounts and credit has rapidly expanded in the last decade, but on the other hand, this access has not necessarily 
translated into suitable use and positive financial health for Indian households – particularly low-income households 
and enterprises. This presents a relevant opportunity for us at Dvara Research, where we, in collaboration with PwC, 
hope to engage with financial service providers (FSPs) on a long-term basis. The intent of our work is to help FSPs 
think about the impact measurement of their work and create actionable insights that can improve the suitability of 
products and services for those typically underserved. 
Dvara Research is an independent, non-partisan, not-for-profit policy research institution based in India with a 
mission to ensure that every low-income household and every small enterprise has complete access to suitable 
financial services and social security through a range of channels that enable them to use these services securely 
and confidently. This has been our mission for 15 years now, and during this time, we have built a strong and 
credible reputation in research and advocacy positions relating to financial inclusion and social protection in India 
from policy, regulatory and practitioner perspectives that are anchored to its mission. Dvara Research considers 
itself to be the voice of low-income households, and we envision a world in which the financial health of low-income 
households and enterprises (our primary stakeholders) is being accorded the highest priority by policymakers 
and practitioners alike. It is in line with this vision that we have embarked on a collaboration with PwC to shift the 
narrative from financial inclusion to financial health as a goal for practitioners and policymakers.
The Financial Health Survey, co-developed by Dvara Research and PwC, is a measurement method for assessing 
the extent and impact of financial inclusion. The survey is a comprehensive diagnostic toolkit that helps in 
understanding how financial access and suitable use of a suite of products and services can lead to improved 
financial health. The survey is intended to be used by policymakers but especially by FSPs, who are much closer 
to serving the financial needs of low-income households and enterprises. We imagine the tool to be capable of (i) 
measuring how changes in the adoption and use of formal finance are changing the levels of financial health for 
households; (ii) measuring the consequence of a policy intervention or a financial sector innovation on financial 
inclusion outcomes; and (iii) identifying factors that may cause the intervention or innovation to have more or less 
consequence for some households as compared to others. 
Indradeep Ghosh
Executive Director,  
Dvara Research
4    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
Table of contents
1.	
Building a resilient future: The need for a financial health framework	
6
2.	
Understanding financial health	
7
3.	
Measuring and understanding financial inclusion	
9
4.	
Financial Health Survey – a diagnostic tool	
10
5.	
Beyond metrics – calibrating for impact	
12
6.	
Value proposition to financial service providers	
14
7.	
Advanced modules to enhance the Financial Health Survey	
16
8.	
Strategic importance of the Financial Health Survey	
18
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   5
1. Building a resilient future: 
The need for a financial health 
framework
Almost 65% of India’s population lives in its rural areas.1 India’s financial sector has seen unprecedented expansion, 
driven by policy initiatives, digital infrastructure and regulatory reforms. Initiatives like Pradhan Mantri Jan-Dhan 
Yojana (PMJDY), Aadhaar-linked banking, Unified Payments Interface (UPI) and digital lending have significantly 
improved access to financial services, particularly for underserved segments.
Evolution of financial inclusion in India
However, mere access does not ensure financial health and stability. Many consumers, despite being part of the 
formal system, face income volatility, low savings and inadequate risk management, limiting the true impact of 
financial inclusion. To address this, a financial health framework is essential in order to move beyond access metrics 
to assess how individuals leverage financial services for long-term financial wellbeing. Financial institutions must 
shift from transactional engagement to personalised, data-driven solutions, using behavioural insights, AI-driven 
analytics and predictive modelling. This will enhance customer retention, improve portfolio resilience and drive 
sustainable growth.
A holistic approach – integrating technology, product innovation, and cross-sector collaboration – is key to 
ensuring financial inclusion efforts translate into tangible financial health improvements. Institutions that embrace 
this shift will be better positioned to capture market opportunities, mitigate risks and contribute to economic 
stability.
Sources: UIDAI; Press Information Bureau; RBI; Women’s World Banking; DFS (MoF); PwC
Launch of 
Aadhaar
Within three 
years of launch, 
510 million 
Aadhaar IDs 
were issued.
Roll out of 
PMJDY
Within one year 
of launch, 180 
million Indians 
(15% of the 
population) 
opened 
accounts.
Demonetisation
Launch of UPI
Surge in use of 
digital payments
UPI-enabled 
banks and non-
banks to operate 
with each other
Digital lending
Share of NBFCs 
in digital lending: 
~6.3%
About 80% of the 
Indian population 
had an account 
with financial 
institutions.
Leapfrogging 
of financial 
development
Gap in financial 
access between 
rich and poor 
narrowed
Gender gap in 
financial access 
improved. 55.4% 
of PMJDY 
account are of 
women.
Release of 
National 
Strategy for 
Financial 
Inclusion
Use of 
technology and 
multi-stakeholder 
approach 
for achieving 
financial 
inclusion
Issuance of 
differentiated 
banking licences 
– small finance 
banks and 
payment banks
1	
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=1894901#:~:text=The%20Survey%20notes%20that%2065,on%20rural%20develop­
ment%20is%20imperative
2010
2014
2016
2017
2020
2021-22
6    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
2. Understanding financial health
The United Nations Secretary-General’s Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance Development (UNSGA) defines 
financial wellbeing as the extent to which a person or family can smoothly manage their current financial obligations 
and have confidence in their financial future.2 Financial health is increasingly being recognised as a litmus test for 
the impact of financial inclusion. It is often construed as a financial state where there is enough financial security 
to meet current needs, plan for the future and handle financial shocks with confidence. A variety of factors – such 
as income predictability, debt management, savings and investments, credit score, ability to handle unexpected 
expenses, and proclivity for setting and planning for financial goals – contribute to a person’s financial health.
Contributing factors for financial health
However, these characteristics, and by extension, the financial health of a person, are contingent upon many other 
aspects of life, like the nature of occupation, initial endowment of wealth, levels of financial inclusion, financial 
awareness and acumen. Simply put, the observed financial health of a salaried employee will vary, on average, 
from that of a smallholder farmer with seasonal income. A salaried employee from a poor household supporting 
many dependents may have a different level of financial health compared to a similar employee from a wealthier 
household with no dependents. Similarly, a tribal nano-entrepreneur is bound to have a different level of financial 
health from that of an entrepreneur from a business family. 
Financial
health
Debt 
management
Financial 
planning
Credit score
Investments
Savings
Income stability
2	
https://www.unsgsa.org/sites/default/files/resources-files/2021-10/unsgsa%20financial%20health%20summary%20report.pdf
Financial health = Function of (*financial awareness, *financial access, *financial product 
usage, #occupation, #wealth endowment, #household-level factors, #individual factors, 
#social capital)
# - Variables that financial service providers cannot immediately influence
* - Variables that financial service providers can influence significantly and measurably
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   7
It is pertinent to note that some of these factors, like occupation, wealth status or household-level characteristics 
are not open to the direct and immediate influence of financial service providers. These might, in the long run, 
interact and be influenced by formal finance. However, in the short to medium term, they are fixed. On the other 
hand, factors like financial access, usage and awareness are amenable to the direct and measurable influence 
of financial service providers. The provision of suitable financial products to the underserviced segments of the 
population by financial service providers can provide better access and enhanced awareness, which in turn can 
influence the financial health of this population. Therefore, the pathway for providers to make a positive impact 
on the financial health of their customers is primarily through access, usage and awareness – all three of which 
important facets of financial inclusion. In fact, the theory of change for financial inclusion rests crucially on the 
interdependence between financial inclusion and financial health – i.e. greater levels of financial inclusion will 
engender better financial health for those included. 
Furthermore, both individually expressed traits (like individual risk appetite and initial wealth) that are idiosyncratic 
and unevenly endowed among members within any group, and group expressed traits (like the nature of occupation 
and levels of inclusion) that are common to groups of people that are similarly placed, have a bearing on financial 
health. Therefore, the same intervention of financial inclusion for different categories of people in different 
circumstances, with varying capabilities and proclivities, could have very contrasting outcomes. Measuring financial 
inclusion outcomes, therefore, becomes crucial to policymaking. Such measurements are used to track progress, 
garner insights and tinker interventions to ensure good outcomes for the financially included population. However, 
financial health, as an outcome of financial inclusion, is hard to measure and even more complex to interpret and 
understand.
8    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
3. Measuring and understanding 
financial inclusion 
Policymakers and financial service providers often measure financial inclusion in terms of access – e.g. the 
number of bank accounts opened, new to-credit customers serviced or new enrolments in government-backed 
insurance schemes like the Pradhan Mantri Jeevan Jyoti Bima Yojana (PMJJBY). This stems partly from the ease 
of measurability of these metrics and partly from considering financial access to be an end goal, rather than a 
means to financial wellbeing. However, given that the anticipated impact is not uniformly observed among the target 
population, usage of these financial products also gets tracked alongside the access metrics – such as dormancy 
of Jan Dhan accounts, or inactive or lapsed life insurance policies. This provides insight into the quality of access 
while also measuring approximate dropout rates in financial inclusion efforts. Further, the impact of access and 
usage was later included in the measurement toolkit to track the realisation of the expected outcomes from financial 
inclusion. This has become particularly important for financial service providers who raise impact capital to provide 
financial services to the underserved segments of the population.
Year-on-year trend for PMJDY accounts
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
Total PMJDY accounts (crore)
% Inoperative PMJDY accounts (crore)
Aug'17
Aug'18
Aug'19
Aug'20
Aug'21
Aug'22
Dec'23
Dec'24
Sources: Press Information Bureau; Department of Financial Services, Ministry of Finance; Government of India
The three categories of metrics – access, usage and impact – are often captured through multiple surveys across 
different sectors, periods and geographies. However, no survey currently offers the capability to understand 
the financial inclusion journey of sub-sections of the population and identify gaps, if any. This diagnostic view is 
needed not just for policymakers but, more crucially, for financial service providers who are looking to enter and 
invest in what is called the ‘Bharat’ customer segment. This segment comprises potential customers who are either 
outside of or new to formal finance, non-homogenous in their needs and aspirations, and looking for relevant and 
meaningful financial products that can suitably integrate them into the formal economy. ‘Bharat’ is a unique market 
with unique traits, requirements and expectations – it is also one that cannot be ignored.
The financial inclusion measurement survey, co-developed by Dvara Research and XKDR Forum, offers a coherent 
framework for capturing all three categories of metrics in an informative, cross-referenced and consistent manner. 
Dvara Research, in partnership with PwC, has refined this framework further to make it actionable and relevant for 
financial service providers particularly.
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   9
Input
(access)
•	
Physical and digital infrastructure
•	
Access to financial assets
•	
Access to financial advice
Output
(usage)
•	
Frequency of use of financial services
Outcome
(impact)
•	
Financial wellbeing
Sources: PwC, Dvara Research
The Financial Health Survey follows an input, output and outcome framework where access metrics are treated as 
inputs to financial inclusion, usage metrics constitute outputs and impact is captured in a set of outcome metrics. 
According to this categorisation, inputs are easy-to-track immediate metrics, outputs denote usage metrics that 
are expected to consolidate over the medium term, and outcomes are characteristics of financial health that would 
manifest over the long term.
4. Financial Health Survey – 
a diagnostic tool
10    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
The survey’s input and output metrics include questions on the access and usage of a suite of financial products like 
savings, investment, credit and insurance. The outcome metrics of financial health are captured by asking questions 
on day-to-day money management, borrowings, resilience, planning and confidence. Furthermore, questions on 
the households’ socio-demographic features, ownership of physical assets, informal money management, and the 
general financial service infrastructure available to them capture individual and group-level traits that characterise 
the surveyed households. These three core metrics, when combined with contextual information about the 
households being surveyed, provide valuable and actionable insights.
Elements of the Financial Health Survey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Financial assets
and liabilities
Financial
wellbeing
Household
socio-
demographic
features
Household
cashflow
Physical asset
ownership
Informal money
management
Financial services
infrastructure
Sources: PwC, Dvara Research
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   11
In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, an emerging trend in household financial behaviour has been the 
increased preference for higher-yielding financial instruments over traditional savings products. Consumers are 
becoming more risk-aware and return-seeking, leading to greater adoption of market-linked investments, insurance 
products with wealth accumulation features and alternative savings instruments.
Distribution of household gross financial savings
50%
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
Deposits
Pension funds
Insurance
Currency
Small savings
Equities
Mutual funds
FY 2021-23
FY 2011-20
Average%
Source: CRISIL
Changing customer preferences for financial products in India are significantly shaping the economy by influencing 
capital markets, banking structures, credit penetration and financial inclusion. 
Shifting customer trends
Rise in alternative 
investments and 
gold digitalisation
Rise in equity 
and mutual fund 
investments
Increased credit 
penetration 
and alternative 
lending
Growing demand 
for insurance 
and pension 
products 
Shift from fixed 
deposits to 
market-linked 
instruments 
5. Beyond metrics – 
calibrating for impact
12    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
Rise in equity and mutual fund investments » Strengthening capital markets
The rise in retail participation in equities and mutual funds is deepening India’s capital markets, enhancing liquidity, 
reducing volatility and boosting domestic business funding, thereby decreasing reliance on foreign institutional 
investments and increasing resilience to global economic shocks.
Growing demand for insurance and pension products » Strengthening social security
Rising retail participation in equities and mutual funds, coupled with increased insurance penetration and demand 
for pension products like the National Pension System (NPS) and annuities, is enhancing financial stability, 
deepening India’s capital markets, boosting long-term capital availability and supporting infrastructure investments.
Shift from fixed deposits to market-linked instruments » Changing banking dynamics
Retail investors are increasingly shifting from traditional bank fixed deposits to mutual funds, stocks and bonds in 
pursuit of higher returns. This trend is leading to a reduction in Current Account Savings Account (CASA) deposits 
with banks. In response, banks are enhancing their wealth management services and creating hybrid investment 
products to retain deposits and cater to the evolving preferences of their customers.
Increased credit penetration and alternative lending » Expanding consumer demand
The increased adoption of buy now pay later (BNPL), personal loans and credit cards is boosting consumer 
spending and stimulating growth in retail, e-commerce and automobile sectors. Enhanced credit access for first-
time borrowers is also driving entrepreneurship and business expansion. However, increased personal debt levels 
could risk household financial stability if not managed properly.
Rise in alternative investments and gold digitalisation » Diversification of savings
Increasing retail participation in equities, mutual funds and alternative investment vehicles like real estate investment 
trusts (REITs), gold exchange traded funds (ETFs) and alternate investment funds (AIFs) is deepening India’s capital 
markets and diversifying savings away from traditional bank deposits and physical assets. This shift enhances 
liquidity, boosts long-term capital availability and reduces reliance on physical gold and real estate. Meanwhile, 
banks are adapting by enhancing wealth management services and creating hybrid products. Although the rise 
of BNPL, personal loans and credit cards is stimulating consumer spending, it is also increasing personal debt 
which could threaten financial stability. Enhanced insurance and pension product demand could further strengthen 
financial resilience and support infrastructure investment.
This shift necessitates that financial service providers evolve their offerings, ensuring that investment solutions, 
lending models and financial planning services are aligned with the evolving risk appetite and financial aspirations of 
consumers. Furthermore, cross-industry collaborations – i.e. among traditional banks, FinTech firms and insurance 
providers – can drive innovative financial solutions that cater to the changing customer needs while promoting long-
term financial stability.
The Financial Health Survey,* comprising access, usage and impact-related insights with customer context and 
background, provides an opportunity to create a real-time direct feedback loop from impact to access. This enables 
financial service providers to leverage this knowledge about the impact pathways of their customer base to tweak 
their service offerings and outreach for different segments of their customer base. Doing this facilitates them to 
create new products and draft processes that can enable relevant, meaningful and targeted impact for these 
customers.
The survey offers a means to monitor the market for product gaps, recognise true value additions and prune product 
misfits on a dynamic basis. This is particularly important for the Bharat segment, which is new to formal finance, 
caught between the formal and informal sides of the economy and, in some ways, cajoled into transitioning to formal 
financial products by a combination of government measures and market imperatives. Being a largely low-income 
segment, the money management practices of such customers who are new to formal financial services also tend 
to be distinctly different from those of established customers who have been integrated into the formal economy for 
years and are familiar with the workings of the financial system. Therefore, meeting the customers from the Bharat 
segment at specific points in their journey and enabling timely and accurate recognition of their needs, pain points 
and preferences, can help ease their transition to formal finance. This is expected to provide good outcomes for all 
stakeholders – optimal financial health for customers, product-market fit for financial service providers, good social 
outcomes for impact investors, and inclusive and sustained growth for the government.
*	
The survey takes 15–25 minutes to complete, based on whether it is done telephonically or in-person.
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   13
Impact measurement often seems like a distant ideal for financial service providers who have many competing 
business considerations around sales, margin, profit, etc., to contend with. Therefore, impact measurement often 
gets relegated to environmental, social and governance (ESG) or annual reports, where it becomes a stock-taking 
exercise that offers little to no value to the business specifically. On the contrary, thoughtfully crafted impact 
measurement that blends market reconnaissance, product feedback and customer insights seamlessly can provide 
strategic intelligence. This can improve the utility of such surveys for the business while also anchoring to the 
welfare of customers and sustainability of the entire business ecosystem. 
Potential impact areas for the survey
Market insights
Gain  
comprehensive 
insights into 
consumer 
consumption 
patterns to 
inform strategic 
decisions.
Services and 
distribution
Optimise service 
delivery channels 
to increase hyper-
personalisation.
Customer 
profiling and 
segmentation
Identify distinct 
customer 
segments and 
their varied 
needs.
Strategic/ 
go-to-market 
(GTM) insights
Draft a 
comprehensive 
strategy and GTM 
recommendation 
to drive 
business growth 
and market 
penetration.
Product 
offerings
Receive tailored 
recommenda­
tions to enhance 
product offerings.
Sources: PwC, Dvara Research
Market insights
 Services and distribution
	»
Potential impact: Financial institutions can anticipate the shifts in demand of their customers and fine-
tune their product and investment strategies, which align with the emerging consumer preferences and 
macroeconomic conditions.
•	
Scenario 1: Mutual funds: The survey revealed that the Gen-Z and millennial population show increased 
preference for thematic and ESG funds. Asset management companies (AMCs) adjusted their marketing 
strategy and recalibrated their investment portfolio to focus more on thematic and ESG investments. AMCs 
may also consider launching customised investment options to cater to the needs of the target customer 
segment.
•	
Scenario 2: Insurance: Insights from the survey indicate a growing demand for hybrid insurance-cum-
investment products among the youth. Insurers develop and promote unit-linked insurance plans (ULIPs) 
that balance protection with wealth creation, thus ensuring higher adoption.
	»
Potential impact: Better accessibility and high customer engagement by hyper-personalising different 
channels to meet regional, behavioural and digital preferences of the customers
•	
Scenario 1: Loan products: Insights from survey revealed an increased preference for consumer loans 
for buying electronic products. Banks can collaborate with e-commerce platforms and retailers to provide 
pre-approved loan solutions or offers on payment using their channels.
6. Value proposition to financial 
service providers
14    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
Customer profiling and segmentation
Strategic/Go-to-market (GTM) insights
 Product offerings
	»
Potential impact: Refinement of customer segmentation models, leading to hyper-personalised offerings 
and better risk assessment
•	
Scenario 1: Credit products: Survey insights reveal that gig economy workers face challenges in credit 
approval due to inconsistent incomes. A bank develops a dynamic risk-based lending model incorporating 
alternative data like transaction patterns and savings behaviour to extend need-based loans.
•	
Scenario 2: Insurance: Behavioural profiling from survey data shows that young professionals are hesitant 
to purchase life insurance due to complexity, lack of transparency and involvement of third-party agents. 
Insurers introduced simplified, digital-first plans with interactive guidance tools, and a tutorial covering the 
basics. All of these helped in increasing penetration in this segment.
	»
Potential impact: The survey helps firms design effective market entry and product positioning strategies, 
ensuring maximum reach and adoption
•	
Scenario 1: Mutual funds: The survey highlights that first-time investors are intimidated by direct equity 
investments but are open to goal-based investing and be more financially aware of investing principles. An 
AMC introduced a ‘first-time investor’ mutual fund portfolio, featuring low-risk and automated rebalancing 
options. They also introduced short, in-app based video tutorials explaining basic financial jargons.
•	
Scenario 2: Financial hedging solutions: The survey insights revealed that many firms operating in the agri 
space are unaware of hedging instruments that protect against commodity price fluctuations. A financial 
institution can reach out to its customers to educate and introduce commodity-linked savings and hedging 
instruments which can be used to secure customers against price fluctuations.
	»
Potential impact: The survey can support innovation by identifying gaps in existing product lines, 
ensuring financial institutions develop relevant, high-demand financial solutions to capture opportunities.
•	
Scenario 1: Banking and savings: A survey revealed that customers prefer options which would 
automatically apply fixed deposits rate to the remaining capital over a limit in their savings account while 
also maintaining liquidity. Bank introduced flexi savings account, which automatically applies fixed deposit 
rates on the balance amount above the limit specified by the user.
•	
Scenario 2: Credit products: Data revealed that women entrepreneurs struggle to secure loans due to lack 
of collateral. A FinTech firm introduced unsecured micro-loans backed by alternative credit scoring model 
and transaction data. This promoted financial inclusion for female business owners.
•	
Scenario 2: Financial savings: Survey data highlights that blue-collar workers prefer various salary-linked 
savings schemes. A bank collaborates with employers to embed automatic NPS/PPF savings along with 
goal-based savings which can be incorporated with the employer’s payroll. This improves savings adoption 
rate.
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   15
Advancements in artificial intelligence, data analytics and behavioural finance can revolutionise how financial 
institutions understand and segment their customer needs. If properly used, these technologies – in addition to the 
Financial Health Survey data – can generate insights which can be used to personalise product offerings. Moving 
from the ‘one-size-fits-all’ approach to specialised product offerings can help financial institutions to increase the 
engagement with their consumers and understand their evolving needs and preferences. 
Models built using emerging technologies can enable financial institutions to analyse spending behaviour, predict 
financial vulnerabilities and offer tailored advisory services, thereby ensuring more inclusive and impactful financial 
offerings. The following diagram represents various modules which when integrated with the financial survey data 
creates opportunity for hyper-personalisation. The ease of implementation decreases for advanced modules while 
the degree of hyper-personalisation increases with each subsequent addition.  
Modules for hyper-personalised services
Financial Health Survey data
Strategic partnerships
Customer persona segmentation and benchmarking
Behavioural finance
AI-driven spend analytics module
Predictive financial health scoring
Credit accessibility and 
embedded finance
Real-time personalised financial 
advisory
Ease of implementation
Hyper-personalisation
Financial institutions can integrate the following key analytical frameworks and technological innovations, structured 
from broad strategic initiatives to specific implementation-level enhancements:
1.	 Strategic partnerships – To create holistic, value-driven financial solutions, financial institutions can 
collaborate with various FinTech, government bodies, service providers and retailers. Insights from Financial 
Health Survey, when coupled with strategic cross-partnerships, can enable the development of co-branded 
financial solutions and/or embedded financial opportunities. This enhances customer experience and creates 
more business opportunities. For example, a financial institution can tie up with an e-commerce platform to 
provide co-branded financing like consumer loans, or shopping cards for expenditure on these platforms. 
Through this dual focus on strategic collaboration and market-product fit analysis, organisations can better 
meet the dynamic needs of their customers.
2.	 Customer persona segmentation and benchmarking – Financial institutions can leverage survey data to 
create detailed customer personas based on socio-economic factors and financial behaviour, allowing for 
7. Advanced modules to enhance 
the Financial Health Survey
Sources: PwC
16    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
targeted comparisons and deeper insights. By comparing individual Financial Health Survey results with broader 
consumer segments, financial institutions can identify various patterns, gaps and other relevant insights which 
can help in personalising financial solutions.
3.	 Behavioural finance – Financial institutions should understand the importance of cognitive biases and 
psychological factors that impact financial decisions. This can help financial institutions to create behavioural 
interventions to improve unit financial health. Through a combination of behavioural finance insights and 
customer benchmarking with the relevant socio-economic segment, financial institutions can incorporate 
nudges like automatic savings, spending notification, and goal-based financial planning features. In the long run, 
this helps the consumer in making better financial decisions and enhance his/her money management skills.
4.	 AI-driven spend analytics module – Financial institutions have a huge amount of data on financial 
transactions. They can leverage machine learning and the AI-driven spend analytics module to gain deeper 
insights into individual spending patterns in relation to socio-economic demographics or benchmark with 
particular customer personas. This would help institutions in understanding how a consumer allocates their 
financial resources across different expense categories and enable the design and development of more 
relevant product offerings for them. Moreover, this would help financial institutions to transition from the ‘one-
product-fits-all’ approach to ‘customised product per customer’, in line with the actual spending habits of the 
customer.
5.	 Predictive financial health scoring – By leveraging the above-mentioned module, financial institutions can 
develop dynamic financial health scores depending alternative data like user spend and savings analysis. This 
can assess a consumer’s financial stability, resilience and probable future financial needs. These scores can 
enable an institution to identify early warnings of financial stress and take timely corrective interventions. This 
approach also enhances risk management, by going beyond traditional risk modelling techniques.
6.	 Credit accessibility and embedded finance – Traditional credit scoring often excludes new-to-credit 
consumers, limiting access to various financial services. By incorporating the previous modules of spending 
pattern analysis, behavioural finance and alternative credit models, financial institutions can broaden their 
credit offerings which can provide access to underserved populations. Embedded financial solutions further 
streamline this process by making credit accessible through various channels and providing tailored options to 
suit individual financial needs.
7.	
Real-time personalised financial advisory – The final module helps financial institutions to move from ‘one-
size-fits-all’ products to offer continuous, adaptive financial guidance. On integration with all the previous 
modules, this enables financial institutions to provide real-time personalised financial recommendations to its 
customers and help them in optimising financial planning and wellbeing.
By integrating these advanced analytical models with the Financial Health Survey data, financial institutions can 
unlock deeper consumer insights, enhance financial inclusion and drive long-term positive financial outcomes for all 
customer segments.
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   17
The Financial Health Survey represents more than just a diagnostic tool; it is a pivotal instrument critical for the 
future of financial inclusion and wellbeing. It provides critical insights that can help financial institutions in their 
policy decisions, product development and customised financial services across different channels. The data can 
also help in identifying gaps in financial inclusion and uncovering nuanced realities of individuals’ financial lives. This 
helps in targeted interventions which can help in improving the financial health of individuals.
There are two possible pathways for financial service providers to engage with the survey based on their needs, 
business strategies and marketing goals:
(i)	 Periodic customer surveys: For providers who are looking to report their impact and map customer needs, 
the Financial Health Survey could be administered to a sample set of customers to offer insights and action 
pathways on an annual or bi-annual basis. 
(ii)	 Strategic engagement: For providers who are looking to launch new products, working in relatively new 
geographies, etc., the Financial Health Survey could be strategically administered for different cohorts of 
customers at various time intervals to garner insights about them, their response to the product and their 
persisting needs.
Independent of the engagement pathway, the Financial Health Survey offers plenty of scope for customisation as 
per the requirements of the financial service provider so that it can provide both impact measurement and market 
research.
The adaptability of this Financial Health Survey enables it to evolve alongside several analytical frameworks and 
technological innovations. This ensures that it remains relevant and effective in addressing the ever-changing 
landscape of financial needs and behaviours. With more technological innovations and integration of data analytics, 
financial institutions will be able to make the shift to tailored financial solutions to meet the diverse needs of every 
individual. Other value propositions for financial institutions include customer-centric strategies, improved risk 
assessment and timely interventions, and alternative credit scoring models. Ultimately, the criticality of this initiative 
lies in its potential to diagnose financial health as well as to catalyse actions that promote financial empowerment, 
economic growth and sustainable development.
8. Strategic importance of the 
Financial Health Survey
18    PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact
About ASSOCHAM
The Associated Chambers of Commerce & Industry of India (ASSOCHAM) is the country's oldest apex chamber. 
It brings in actionable insights to strengthen the Indian ecosystem, leveraging its network of more than 4,50,000 
members, of which MSMEs represent a large segment. With a strong presence in states, and key cities globally, 
ASSOCHAM also has more than 400 associations, federations and regional chambers in its fold.
Aligned with the vision of creating a New India, ASSOCHAM works as a conduit between the industry and the 
Government. The Chamber is an agile and forward-looking institution, leading various initiatives to enhance the 
global competitiveness of the Indian industry, while strengthening the domestic ecosystem.
With more than 100 national and regional sector councils, ASSOCHAM is an impactful representative of the Indian 
industry. These Councils are led by well-known industry leaders, academicians, economists and independent 
professionals. The Chamber focuses on aligning critical needs and interests of the industry with the growth 
aspirations of the nation.
ASSOCHAM is driving four strategic priorities - Sustainability, Empowerment, Entrepreneurship and Digitisation. 
The Chamber believes that affirmative action in these areas would help drive an inclusive and sustainable socio-
economic growth for the country.
ASSOCHAM is working hand in hand with the government, regulators and national and international think tanks to 
contribute to the policy making process and share vital feedback on implementation of decisions of far-reaching 
consequences. In line with its focus on being future-ready, the Chamber is building a strong network of knowledge 
architects. Thus, ASSOCHAM is all set to redefine the dynamics of growth and development in the technology-
driven 'Knowledge-Based Economy. The Chamber aims to empower stakeholders in the Indian economy by 
inculcating knowledge that will be the catalyst of growth in the dynamic global environment.
The Chamber also supports civil society through citizenship programmes, to drive inclusive development. 
ASSOCHAM's member network leads initiatives in various segments such as empowerment, healthcare, education 
and skilling, hygiene, affirmative action, road safety, livelihood, life skills, sustainability, to name a few.
Dr Rajesh Singh
Additional Director & Head, Dept. of Banking & Financial Services, 
ASSOCHAM
rajesh.singh@assocham.com 
The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of India
4th Floor, YMCA Cultural Centre and Library Building,
01 Jai Singh Road, New Delhi – 110001
Website: www.assocham.org
About Dvara Research
Dvara Research is an independent, non-partisan, not-for-profit policy research institution based in India. Its mission 
is to ensure that every low-income household and every small enterprise has complete access to suitable financial 
services and social security through a range of channels that enable them to use these services securely and 
confidently. Since 2008, Dvara Research has deeply analysed and carefully written about financial inclusion and 
social protection in India from policy, regulatory, and practitioner perspectives that are anchored to its mission. In 
all its research efforts, Dvara Research always strives to maintain an independent voice that speaks for the low-
income household and household enterprise, and its ability to perform this function is significantly enhanced by its 
commitment to disseminate as a pure public good, all the intellectual capital that it creates.  
To know about our work, visit www.dvararesearch.com or write to us at communications.dr@dvara.com
 PwC | Dvara Research | ASSOCHAM | Financial health: Transcending from access to impact   19
pwc.in
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or 
CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which 
is a separate legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed 
by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. 
Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. 
Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are 
entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this 
publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2025 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved.
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms in
151 countries with over 360,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory and tax
services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal entity.
Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2025 PwC. All rights reserved.
Contact us
Gayathri Parthasarathy
India Financial Services Sector Leader and Global 
Financial Services Technology Leader 
PwC India
gai.partha@pwc.com
+91-98190 29924
Jaikrishnan G
Partner, One Consulting 
PwC India
jaikrishnan.gk@pwc.com
+91-95353 66660
Vivek Patil
Partner, Financial Services Advisory 
PwC India
vivek.v.patil@pwc.com
Vivek Belgavi
Partner and Leader, Financial Services Technology, Alliances 
and Ecosystem 
PwC India
vivek.belgavi@pwc.com
+91-98202 80199
Contributors 
From PwC:
Avneesh Narang
Amal S Pilla
Raghav Aggarwal
Narayanan Mahadevan
Vignesh Venkataraman
Ishan Paira
Sabarish Sriram
 
From Dvara Research:
Misha Sharma
Priyadarshini Ganesan
Aishwarya Narayan
Editor
Rashi Gupta
