May 2024
6th February 2025
Key takeaways from the Ministry of Finance, 
Government of India 
PwC India FS Risk 
Symposium
Keynote session
PwC India proudly conducted the fourth edition of its flagship Financial Services (FS) Risk Symposium 
on 6th February 2025 in Gurugram – the first of its kind in the north region.
The symposium brought together industry leaders and experts from the FS sector to share their 
knowledge, experiences, insights and strategies to help navigate the uncertain and emerging risk 
landscape of the banking, financial services and insurance (BFSI) space. 
This edition of the symposium was meticulously designed to focus on the emerging challenges faced by 
the financial institutions on the:
evolving complexities of anti-money laundering (AML)/know your customer (KYC) compliances
recently updated Digital Personal Data Protection (DPDP) guidelines to strengthen data 
protection measures for Indian citizens. 
risks associated with operational and cyber management policies
2  |    PwC  PwC India FS Risk Symposium
3  |    PwC  PwC India FS Risk Symposium
Smarak Swain, an esteemed officer of the Ministry of Finance, was the keynote speaker and commenced 
the symposium with an engaging speech that touched upon the complexity of cybersecurity challenges 
and geopolitical concerns that predominantly loom over the FS industry today. His address underlined 
the vulnerabilities in the crypto field, especially stressing on a significant factor that ‘crypto exchanges are 
semi-regulated entities in India, despite having a fund balance of around INR 4,000 crore’. He highlighted 
a crypto exchange platform incident, which resulted in the loss of around USD 230 million and ascribed it 
to insufficient incident response systems and poor cybersecurity hygiene.
Swain further emphasised the importance of cybersecurity measures and the methods of corrective 
implementations and constant vigilance, noting that the breach was more of a ‘sleight of hand’ exploiting 
employee psychology, rather than a sophisticated attack. This incident was a sobering reminder of 
the significance of implementing strong cybersecurity systems as well as the increased possibility of 
reputational damages due to a single hack.
Moving forward to geopolitical risks, Swain discussed in length the possible consequences of political 
developments in the US and Middle-East. Highlighting currency conversions and the involvement of global 
intermediaries, the discussion also addressed the effect of the US Treasury sanctions on trade dynamics 
between different countries.
Additionally, Swain brought attention to some of the risks highlighted in the National Risk Assessment 
(NRA) 2022 and announced that the next iteration of the NRA will be released in 2025. He mentioned that 
this forthcoming version will adopt a bottom-up approach, ensuring high involvement of the private sector 
to enrich the assessment with diverse perspectives and insights.
The address further explored the ongoing difficulties stemming from the constant evolution of regulatory 
compliance and its associated risk assessments. Emphasising the role of corporate compliance officers in 
negotiating challenging regulatory settings, Swain recommended they pivot their focus towards a bottom-
up strategy in risk management. To achieve precise documentation and risk assessments within financial 
institutions, it is essential to have a thorough knowledge of client due diligence and integrate consistent 
KYC procedures that will allow firms to better manage regulatory shifts in the near future.
In conclusion to his insightful address, Swain urged industry stakeholders to be alert and proactive 
in addressing such challenges by clearly delineating the link between cybersecurity and geopolitical 
concerns in their assessment models. The address ultimately served as a call to action for the financial 
industry and its leaders to appropriately, yet comprehensively, enhance resilience against progressing 
threats and uncertainties. 
4  |    PwC  PwC India FS Risk Symposium
About PwC
At PwC, our purpose is to build trust in society and solve important problems. We’re a network of firms 
in 151 countries with over 360,000 people who are committed to delivering quality in assurance, advisory 
and tax services. Find out more and tell us what matters to you by visiting us at www.pwc.com.
PwC refers to the PwC network and/or one or more of its member firms, each of which is a separate legal 
entity. Please see www.pwc.com/structure for further details.
© 2025 PwC. All rights reserved.
pwc.in
Data Classification: DC0 (Public)
In this document, PwC refers to PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (a limited liability company in India having Corporate Identity Number or 
CIN : U74140WB1983PTC036093), which is a member firm of PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited (PwCIL), each member firm of which is 
a separate legal entity.
This document does not constitute professional advice. The information in this document has been obtained or derived from sources believed 
by PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited (PwCPL) to be reliable but PwCPL does not represent that this information is accurate or complete. 
Any opinions or estimates contained in this document represent the judgment of PwCPL at this time and are subject to change without notice. 
Readers of this publication are advised to seek their own professional advice before taking any course of action or decision, for which they are 
entirely responsible, based on the contents of this publication. PwCPL neither accepts or assumes any responsibility or liability to any reader of this 
publication in respect of the information contained within it or for any decisions readers may take or decide not to or fail to take.
© 2025 PricewaterhouseCoopers Private Limited. All rights reserved. 
PS/February 2025/ 44064
